Journal 3
VIEW SOURCE
This page is for Journal 3, the in-universe book. For the merchandise, see Gravity Falls: Journal 3.
Star.pngJournal #3

Type
Journal
First appearance
First episode
Tourist Trapped
Last episode
Weirdmageddon 2: Escape From Reality (pictured)
Appearances
25
[Source]
Journal #3 is a mysterious journal written by Stanford Pines. It was later discovered by Dipper Pines. It is the third and final installment in a series of journals preceded by Journal #1 and Journal #2. It contains an encyclopedic collection of information on the variety of paranormal and supernatural creatures living in Gravity Falls, Oregon.
Disney released the real world edition of Journal 3 on July 26, 2016. The standard edition contained the show's contents of Journal 3, as well as additional information. The real world edition of Journal 3 was also listed on the Top 5 Best Gravity Falls Fan Merchandise list.


Contents
1 History
1.1 Season 1
1.2 Season 2
1.3 After the series
2 Contents
2.1 Introductory pages
2.2 Barf Fairy
2.3 Bill Cipher
2.4 The Blind Eye
2.5 Codes
2.6 Creature Control Apparatus
2.7 Cryogenic Tube
2.8 Cursed Doors
2.9 Dipper's pages
2.10 Floating Eyeballs
2.11 Ghosts
2.12 Ghosts: Category 1
2.13 Ghosts: Category 9
2.14 Ghosts: Category 10
2.15 Giant Vampire Bats
2.16 Gnomes
2.17 The Gremloblin
2.18 Haunted Paintings & Image-based Spectres
2.19 Height Alteration
2.20 The Hide Behind
2.21 Hiding spot
2.22 Invisible Ink
2.23 Island Head Beast
2.24 Leprecorn
2.25 Portal page
2.26 Nathaniel Northwest conspiracy
2.27 Percepshrooms
2.28 Machine page
2.29 Security Room
2.30 Spells
2.31 Squash with a Human Face and Emotions
2.32 Stomach-Faced Duck
2.33 Trust No One and wheel page
2.34 Truth Telling Teeth
2.35 The Undead
2.36 Unknown pages: photocopied pages
2.37 Various symbols
2.38 Miscellaneous information
3 Appearance
3.1 Monocle
3.2 Page Order (from left to right)
4 Sightings
4.1 Season 1
4.2 Shorts
4.3 Season 2
4.4 Games
5 Trivia
6 Gallery
7 References
8 Site navigation
History

The strange machine in the metal tree.

Over thirty years prior to Dipper and Mabel's arrival in Gravity Falls, Stanford Pines recorded and compiled a list of all the creatures and paranormal entities inhabiting the town, following his completion of Journal 1 and Journal 2. Fearful he was being watched by malevolent forces, Ford hid his three journals in separate and elaborate locations around Gravity Falls, hoping to keep the knowledge needed to activate the Interdimensional Portal away from evil forces. Designing a security mechanism hidden above his bunker, Ford kept Journal 3 hidden for years until his disappearance through the Interdimensional Portal.

Season 1

Dipper uncovers the compartment containing Journal 3.

The journal is found by Dipper in "Tourist Trapped," when he unknowingly locates Ford's artificial metal tree in the forest. Activating a switch that revealed its hiding chamber, he immediately relocates to the Mystery Shack, and uses Journal 3's information to believe that Mabel's new found boyfriend, "Norman," is in fact, a zombie. During his investigation, he discovers that Norman is actually a disguise fabricated by a group of gnomes, to which the journal has no knowledge of defeating. Following their defeat, he uses the blank pages of Journal 3 to document his own adventures with the town, learning to trust some of the town's residents.

Journal 3 continues to assist Dipper in his encounters with the supernatural, including guiding him into a cave behind a waterfall in "The Legend of the Gobblewonker," during which he, Mabel and Soos flee from Old Man McGucket's Gobblewonker robot.

In "Headhunters," Dipper flips through a few pages at the scene of Wax Stan's murder, and is seen reading it at the living room table after Mabel returns from her first date with Gideon Gleeful in "The Hand That Rocks the Mabel." Dipper shows the page on ghosts to Mabel in the gift shop in "The Inconveniencing," and later to Wendy Corduroy and her friends.

Journal 3 returns in "Irrational Treasure," the twins read about the town law stating it is legal to marry woodpeckers, and later, after Pacifica Northwest teases Mabel, read about and investigate the possibility of Nathaniel Northwest, alleged town founder and great-great grandfather of Pacifica, being a fraud.

Dipper reads about height-altering crystals in "Little Dipper," wishing to use them to make himself taller, and checks on its position in his vest pocket as Gideon Gleeful interrogates him about how he came upon the crystals. Later, Dipper uses the journal to help him catch a Gremloblin in "Boss Mabel."

In "Bottomless Pit!," Mabel, who reads it for the first time in the series, uses the journal to uncover the Truth Telling Teeth. Dipper is seen reading the floating eyeballs and giant vampire bats pages of the journal in "Land Before Swine," and uses it to follow Bill Cipher into Stan's mindscape in "Dreamscaperers."


Bill displaying Journal 3 in "Dreamscaperers."

Journal 3 plays a key role in Dipper and Mabel's plan to reclaim the Mystery Shack's deed in "Gideon Rises," eventually agreeing to ally with the gnomes. When the plot fails, Journal 3 falls into Gideon's hands, who believes he has found Journal 1, but quickly learns of the presence of a third journal, and hunts the twins with the Gideon-bot. After a fight, the robot explodes, and Dipper relocates Journal 3 in the rubble. Back in the shack, the twins agree to reveal the journal to Stan, who feigns disbelief in the book's contents, and confiscates it to create new attractions. In reality, Stan hides the journal within his laboratory alongside Journal 1 and Journal 2, having collected all three. Now in possession of the knowledge he requires, Stan activates the Universe portal, hidden deep within the catacombs of the Mystery Shack.

Season 2
Following the portal's activation, Stan photocopies Journal 3's contents before returning it to his nephew, allowing him to continue to explore its secrets in "Scary-oke." After the arrival of Agent Powers and Agent Trigger, Dipper attempts to reveal the paranormal information of Journal 3, much to Stan's chagrin. Despite their disbelief, a curse from the journal is accidentally invoked, and a horde of zombies is raised that crash the Mystery Shack is Back party. During the attack, the Pines learn that some of the journal has been written in invisible ink revealed by blacklight, allowing them to learn the weakness of zombies.

In "Into the Bunker," Dipper uses his black light to uncover the location of the Bunker in Journal 3. It also helps him and his friends to get by the Bunker's defenses. The Shape Shifter (looking like the man on Baron Num Nums High Flyin' Beans, but mistaken as the Author by Dipper) tries to trick Dipper into giving him the Journal, desiring to increase it's repertoire of forms. In "Sock Opera," Mabel uses the Journal as a prop for her sock puppet show. Bill Cipher (possessing Dipper's body) tries to find and destroy it, but is stopped by Mabel.

In "Society of the Blind Eye," Dipper (believing Old Man McGucket to be the Author) shows him some of the Journal's pages, leading to their discovery of the Blind Eye Society. In "Little Gift Shop of Horrors," Dipper uses his black light to learn of the Percepshrooms and their intelligence-enhancing properties. In "Northwest Mansion Mystery," Dipper uses it to look up Ghost categories. Learning that the Ghost of Northwest Manor is a category 10, he checks the entry, using the black light to uncover the best way to deal with them. The entry tells him to "pray for mercy."

In "Not What He Seems," Dipper uncovers a warning against using the Universe portal (written in invisible ink) by joining the blueprints of Journal 3 with those on Journal 1 and Journal 2. In "The Last Mabelcorn," Journal 3 is seen in Ford's mindscape, as he is running to confront Bill about the true purpose for the portal. In "Dipper and Mabel vs. the Future," Ford shows Dipper that he read Dipper's notes added in Journal 3.


During Weirdmageddon, Bill burns the three journals

In "Weirdmageddon Part 1," Bill burns Journal 3 alongside Journal 1 and Journal 2 into pieces after Dipper attempts to use them to defeat Bill. The only pages that remain of Journal 3 is the Bill Cipher page and the page to stop his chaos. In "Weirdmageddon 2: Escape From Reality," after Bill mentions bringing Ford out of retirement, his eye shows various images from the pages in Journal 3.

After the series
The journals were recovered by Soos, seemingly unharmed after Weirdmageddon had ended. After finding them, Soos brought the journals to Dipper. Apparently, defeating Bill didn't just de-weird the town, it also restored many things he destroyed, including the journals. After Dipper kept the Journals to himself for a few days, he revealed them to Ford. The family decided to throw them into the Bottomless Pit[1] to rid themselves of the trouble caused by them, and because things thrown into the pit could end up anywhere.[2] The journal was recently found in a mossy clearing in the forests by the Parks Department in Oregon while on a routine moose-tagging mission. But since discovering the journal, the troopers have had headaches and disturbing nightmares. The journal was put up for purchase at their Confiscated Items Sale/Bake-Off, in hope of taking the "cursed thing" of their hands.[citation needed]

Contents
Note: The following information is derived from the show and not the real world book. So some differences will occur, though both are considered canonical.
Introductory pages

3's introductory pages.

Left page:

June 18,
It's hard to believe it's been six years since I began researching the strange and wondrous secrets of Gravity Falls, Oregon.
In all my travels, never have I observed so many curious things! Gravity Falls is indeed a geographical oddity.

Right page:

35 3 30
First page is a farce. Uhhh, to the untrained beginner's eye it may seem to contain relevant information. I can assure you it's not the case. For you see, this is all gibberish. Pure nonsense, if you wish. In fact, none of my sample writing is of any significance. I rarely dot my I's and cross my T's, punctuation has alone taken a bind next to pure theater. It is indeed a long lost stunt. Please enjoy. Please enjoy the irrelevant and incomprehensible rambling seen

13
1 345 6 12 89 10 11
Barf Fairy
While looking for ideas to defeat Gideon in the journal, Dipper mentions a page describing a "barf fairy."[3]

Bill Cipher

Bill Cipher.

Bill Cipher
Symbol cipher - L.pngSymbol cipher - I.pngSymbol cipher - A.pngSymbol cipher - R.png
Symbol cipher - M.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - N.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - T.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - R.png
Symbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - N.pngSymbol cipher - A.pngSymbol cipher - P.pngSymbol cipher - P.pngSymbol cipher - Y.png
Symbol cipher - D.pngSymbol cipher - R.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - R.png
Is he watching me?

CAESER
ATBASH
A1Z26

Bill has proven himself to be one of the friendliest and most trustworthy individuals that I've ever encountered in my life. What a guy! I honestly can't trust him more. Not evil in any way, Bill is a true gentleman.

BILL CAN'T BE TRUSTED!
Beware Bill. The most powerful and dangerous creature I've ever encountered. Whatever you do, never let him into your mind.
Under blacklight the following is revealed

S2e18 Blacklight Bill page.png
If he gains physical form then all is lost!
Right page:

It is possible to follow the demon into a person's mind and prevent his chaos.
MORAL
REFLECTIVES
THE LADIES
DOMESTIC
fig. 4
DO NOT SUMMON AT ALL COSTS!
Following page:

One must simply recite this incantation: Fidentus omnium. Magister mentium. Magnesium ad hominem. Magnum opus. Habeas corpus. Inceptus Nolanus overratus. Magister mentium. Magister mentium. Magister mentium.
Alchemic symbols: fire of circulation

The Blind Eye
Main article: Blind Eye Society

The Blind Eye pages.

There are two known pages about the Blind Eye Society, though the text just calls it "The Blind Eye." The page on the left includes a sketch of one of a robed society member, including the text "there it is again!" with an arrow pointing to the symbol on the member's hood.

THERE IT IS AGAIN!
Right page:

The Blind Eye
WHAT DOES IT MEAN?
CAN'T BE UNSEEN
??? ??

Symbol cipher - I.pngSymbol cipher - F.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - M.pngSymbol cipher - Y.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - U.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - P.pngSymbol cipher - I.pngSymbol cipher - C.pngSymbol cipher - I.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - N.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - A.pngSymbol cipher - R.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - C.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - R.pngSymbol cipher - R.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - C.pngSymbol cipher - T.png,Symbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - T.pngSymbol cipher - H.pngSymbol cipher - I.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - I.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - T.pngSymbol cipher - H.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - W.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - R.pngSymbol cipher - K.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - F.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - F.pngSymbol cipher - I.pngSymbol cipher - D.pngSymbol cipher - D.pngSymbol cipher - L.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - F.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - R.pngSymbol cipher - D.png.Symbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - D.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - H.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - R.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - A.pngSymbol cipher - L.pngSymbol cipher - L.pngSymbol cipher - Y.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - H.pngSymbol cipher - A.pngSymbol cipher - V.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - T.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - G.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - T.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - U.pngSymbol cipher - C.pngSymbol cipher - H.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - G.pngSymbol cipher - R.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - A.pngSymbol cipher - T.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - L.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - N.pngSymbol cipher - G.pngSymbol cipher - T.pngSymbol cipher - H.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - T.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - F.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - R.pngSymbol cipher - G.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - T.png
Alchemic symbols: reduction, composition, pulverise, digestion, fusion

Codes
S2e11 codes page.png
This page in the book has various, unknown symbols. It says "caesar," "atbash," and "A1Z26," and under a black light, the cipher sequences are written out. Two coded blocks of text also appear. One appears to be a variation of the Pigpen cipher. The left page is not yet known, but contains the alchemy symbol: fire of circulation.

Creature Control Apparatus

Internal mechanism.

The book has details outlining how the author build the cryogenic freezing chamber he used to contain the Shape Shifter. The left page details how the apparatus pumps the liquid nitrogen. The right page contains a cross section of the chamber itself, labeling the nitrogen core and insulation. There is a cipher on the right page (written in the author's symbol substitution cipher) that decodes to "Ice Ice Baby."

Right page:

Once cooling has completed, the popsicles are done.
Cryogenic Tube
Main article: Shape Shifter
S2e2 Shapeshifter book.png
Figure A is a sketch of the Shape Shifter hatching from an egg, with an arrow pointing to it saying:

Found while excavating!
Figure B is a sketch of the cryogenic tube created to contain the creature. The author drew "Form #6" of the Shape Shifter, which closely resembles the creature Dipper and Wendy encountered, though the left "bicep" is smaller in the drawing.

Left page:

Watch your fingers!
Fig A: Creature hatched within three days of discovery.
DNA constantly changes
fig. B
liquid nitrogen
Chamber #3
Right page:

Carbon, aluminum and steel alloy tube. The power structure is small and limited within new section of laboratory. Cryogenic fluids are stored in large lumber surfaces ___ temperatures, until we fix power.
DO NOT LET OUT!
Form #6: New unfamiliar form has been witnessed ___ eight times thus far. Lurks in the shadows.
Extremely unpredictable!
It's too powerful!
IT CAN TRANSFORM!
New ___ has a ___ on me. Not trusting ___ my life. I won't trust him, I won't trust myself. I'm not sure I am who I am.
The creature can change forms at will. No way to tell when it's real or not.
IT'S PLAYING TRICKS ON ME

Symbol cipher - A.pngSymbol cipher - M.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - I.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - M.pngSymbol cipher - E.png?
Symbol cipher - I.pngSymbol cipher - S.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - H.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - M.pngSymbol cipher - E.png?

Alchemic symbols: purification, solution, terra/earth

Cursed Doors
S1e1 3 book cursed doors.png
Left page:

Case #28
Rumors of ____ ____ your long dead in the form of doors ____ the ____ doors ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ sounds before ____ ____ wherever they ____ . This phenomenon is unexplained.
AVOID THIS DOOR ON MAIN STREET!
____ moon
Any door with the number thirteen is a portal to a different world.
Right page:

Cursed Doors
KNOCK KNOCK! WHO'S THERE? THE FORCES OF EVIL!
DARK ENERGY READINGS 40% HIGHER THIS YEAR!
Cursed door are common ____ ____ ____ _____ of enter ____ energy force emanating from ____ [crossed out] _____ ____

when ____ ____ link is ____
Alchemic symbols: solution, extraction of dryness, fusion, fire of circulation

Dipper's pages

Dipper's page.

The left page has a few words cut off and a drawing of a Mystery Shack bumper sticker:

If you go on enough road trips chances are, you've seen a certain bumper sticker: WHAT IS THE MYSTERY SHACK?
Right page:

Finally back safe and sound from one of the weirdest days at Gravity Falls. This journal told me there was no one in Gravity Falls I could trust, but when you battle a thousand gnomes side-by-side with someone, you realize that they've probably always got your back.
Floating Eyeballs

Floating Eyeballs.

Left page:

FLOATING EYEBALLS
are they watching me?
Visible only at night
No retinal cord
No response to contact
Spooky
Right page:

Only recently
it is ____ that the eye had retinal ____ ____ proved

is a false.

Under blacklight.

Under black light further information is revealed in invisible ink. Over the word 'EYEBALLS' they author wrote 'NONSENSE.' They also crossed out the eyeball doodle in the corner of the page.

NONSENSE!
I WAS WRONG TO WORRY ABOUT THESE THINGS! THEY ARE INCONSEQUENTIAL!
PEPPER SPRAY MAKES 'EM GO AWAY!!!!
Ghosts

Ghosts.

Ghosts
ALWAYS HAVE A REASON OF SOME KIND.
PHOTOGRAPHIC PROOF!
ECTOPLASM SAMPLE (GRAVITY FALLS TOWN HALL)
Alchemic symbols: composition, digestion, fusion, pulverise

Ghosts: Category 1

Category 1.

The left page details the categorization of ghosts, beginning with category 1. The image depicted on the right page resembles Casper the friendly ghost in a helicopter hat, with several floating dishes around it and an arrow pointing to it saying "Kinda Cute."

Ghosts
Several different ghosts have been observed in Gravity Falls.
CATEGORY 1
EH.

KINDA CUTE→
Ghosts: Category 9

Category 9.

The image on the left page is of a ghost resembling Freddy Krueger, albeit wearing an eye-patch, a horizontal zigzag sweater, pants and shoes. On the ghost's right hand is a glove with various utensils attach to each finger being a bottle cap opener, a knife, a spoon and a fork. There is also an arrow pointing to it saying "Dream Hipster." The page also has a message by the lower left corner of the page reading:

Turns Power Naps into Horror Naps
Ghosts: Category 10

Category 10.

The left page details the dangers of this category.

Category ten ghosts and spectres are extremely dangerous and should be avoided at all costs.
Category 10
DANGER!
Advice:
(In invisible ink) Pray for mercy!
The image on the right page is of a spectre with a skeleton-like face, tattered robes, and a scythe, which somewhat resembles the Grim Reaper or Death.

Giant Vampire Bats
Desmodus Rotundus
GIANT VAMPIRE BATS!!
10 feet
In invisible ink it is revealed that the Vampire Bats are actually fruit bats. Over the word 'VAMPIRE' the author wrote 'FRUIT.' They sketched out a pear and grapes on either side of the bat illustration. And crossed out the eyes of the bat head drawing. Over the detailed notes they wrote a new message which is underlined.

NOTHING TO WORRY ABOUT. ALL THEY WANT IS FRUIT.
Gnomes

Updated gnome page.

In "Gideon Rises," it's shown that Dipper has filled the weakness part with "leaf blowers" and scratched out the question mark at the end.

GNOMES
Creature #24
DANGER UNKNOWN
Little men of the Gravity Falls Forest.
Left page:

I encountered my first gnome when I awoke one mourning and found it arguing politics with the stuffed bear head above my fireplace. They have shown themselves capable of the alarming ability to combine their squishy little bodies with large formations. So keeping my snacks on higher shelves has done nothing to stop their persistent nibbling. Another Gnome stole my glasses and ate two of my cassette tapes.
Right page:

The typical size of the common gnome ranges from ten to eighteen inches. This includes the hat. They refuse to remove their hats. Do they have pointy heads? Mushrooms are a huge part of a gnomes life. Used for money? They are both the most delightful and most destructive magical species I have discovered. Do not get on their bad side - or come between them and their pet pinecone.
WEAKNESS: leaf blowers ?
Pointy hats! I must find out what's under that blasted hat.
The Gremloblin

The Gremloblin

Also mentioned by Dipper: If you look into his eyes you can see your worst nightmares.

The Gremloblin
Fungi detail

Half gremlin, half goblin. Proof that some creatures should NOT interbreed. (See Leprecorn and WereMaid [Journal 1].)

It's hard to look at it, and it's ever harder to say it's name three times fast!

The creature is even uglier up close than I expected.
Right page:

As I was sketching, my assistant became increasingly agitated. He cowered behind a tree and pleaded me to move along. Just as I was telling him to not worry, the Hyperdrive, which I thought was inactive, emitted an ear-piercing alarm from F's backpack! (Perhaps the altitude-based change in air pressure had kick-started it.) The Gremloblin awoke with a start, grabbed my assistant with his claws, and stared intently into F's eyes!
CLAWS EMIT NUEROTOXINS!
WING STRUCTURE (phase II)
I was impressed to get such an amazing view of the elusive creature, but now not the time for sketching! Hoping to startle the beast, I hurled my canteen at him, splashing him with water. A word of advise to future readers: when fighting a Gremloblin use water... [next page] only as a last resort as water will make him much much scarier.
Alchemic symbols: purification, solution, strong fire

Haunted Paintings & Image-based Spectres

Haunted Paintings & Image-based Spectres

According to this page, spectres can be trapped in a silver mirror. A sketch of a ghost stretches from the left page towards the right, showing a ghost coming out of a painting (left) and being trapped in a silver mirror (right).

haunted painting
SHE'S ALWAYS WATCHING!!
Haunted Paintings & Image-based Spectres
SILVER mirror shows–
Height Alteration
Main article: Height-altering crystals

Height Alteration

Left page:

fig 1. crystal
these shiny crystals are found in a glades deep within the forest of Gravity Falls. Common in ______ the sets ____ shiny ____ ____ ____ ____ ____
Different colors perform different functions.
A shrinking properties
B enlarging properties
C ordinary crystal
larger ____ ____ ____ true life
FOUND NEAR THE CRYSTALS
fig 2
Right page:

Height Altering
Legends telling of miniature buffalo and giant squirrels have lead me to believe that there are height altering properties buried deep within the forest...
Alchemic symbols: reduction, fixation

The Hide Behind

The Hide Behind

The Hide Behind
Mysterious creature of the shadows. _______ behind the _____ one
The unseen shadow of 2 men.
FOOTPRINTS!
NEVER BEEN SEEN!
Hiding spot

Hiding Spot page.

The page is an illustration of the tree Dipper originally found Journal 3 nearby of. And the switch box that was inside the tree that opened the compartment in the ground. The corner of the page has the words "Hiding Spot?" but under blacklight more firmly states "My Hiding Spot." The blacklight reveals more to the illustration, showing a hidden staircase that winds around the tree, and a warning pointing down to a bunker under the tree's roots. A small eye has been doodled on the screen of the mechanism that opened Journal 3's compartment.

Giant pinecones!
HIDING SPOT?

⇩
DANGER!
LAST RESORT
↓ PREPARE FOR THE END
The accompanying page on the left has a binary code. Under blacklight it shows the symbol of the Blindeye Society. The symbol was first revealed when putting together all six page pieces from "Dipper's Guide to the Unexplained." The binary decodes to: "Put all six pieces together!"

01010000011101010111010000100000011000010110110001101100001000000111001101101001011110000010000001110000011010010110010101100011011001010111001100100000011101000110111101100111011001010111010001101000011001010111001000100001
Alchemic symbols: composition, terre/earth, extraction of dryness, cementation

Invisible Ink
S2e1 invisible ink close.png
The left page is blank under normal lighting, but when placed under a black light reads:

I have decided to use invisible ink to keep away prying eyes. ANYONE could be watching me!
In normal lighting, the right page has illegible text and drawings of an inkwell with the text "ways to hide" and a light bulb. Under a black light, an eye is drawn on top of the initial drawing of the coil of the light bulb. The word "invisible" is written on the label on the inkwell, where is previously read as "ink."

Island Head Beast

Island Beast Head pages.

Left page:

Island Head Beast
Creature #202
Giant tooth
IS THERE A CREATURE BENEATH THE ISLAND?
ONE GIANT HEADACHE!
Right page:

There is no other place I would rather be in Gravity Falls than the lake. It reminds me of my childhood... Glass Shard Beach.
The flora seen throughout the lake area is tropical. After some of my adventures in this region, I am surprised not to discover something more unusual.
common lake plants
Leprecorn

The Leprecorn

When Dipper showed the government agents his journal, this page was seen but the two quickly dismiss Dipper’s claim.[4]

There are two Caesar cipher codes on its pages.

A disappointment to Unicorn enthusiasts and Leprechaun hunters alike, these giggling freaks of nature are found near Rainbows and box of sugary cereals with colorful marshmallow shapes. I was searching in a nearby field for four leafed clovers to use in a luck experiment when I encountered this specimen, he said "TOP O' THE MORNIN' TO YA!" and then preceded to chew on my sideburns and giggle. I picked him up by the horn and throw him as far as I could but he trotted back. Their horns are musical and play a constant loop of "Danny Boy" It is VERY IRRITATING. Gold coins fell out of his beard, I pocketed a few but later discovered they were plastic, everything about this creature is frustrating... I shudder to think how such a horrific being come into existence although I can state for the record that actual Unicorns are just as annoying.
Leprecorn
HOOF PRINT
FOUR LEAF CLOVER
ZDWFK RXW
Right page:

RAINBOW TAIL/MANE
NLOO PH SOHDVH
Alchemic symbols: extraction of dryness, fusion, strong fire, purification, solution

Portal page

Maze Page.


Under a black light.

See also: Universe portal
Near the center of the book is a two page spread which is part of a larger schematic on the Universe portal. These pages are part of a larger algorithm needed to start the portal.

When placed together with the other two journals, it completes a warning written in invisible ink (the bold is the contents of Journal 3)

The machine was meant to create knowledge but it is too powerful! The device, if fully operational could tear our universe apart! I was wrong the whole time! It must not fall into the wrong hands. If the clock ever reaches zero our universe is doomed! Total global destruction!
Nathaniel Northwest conspiracy
Main article: Northwest Cover-up

Page on the conspiracy.


Unfolded map.

In my investigations I have recently made a discovery, Nathaniel Northwest was not be the founder of Gravity Falls. And his entire family legacy is a fraud! I believe the proof of this secret is buried somewhere in the enclosed document. If only I could crack the code...
Attached to the page is a map, which Dipper noted to contain alchemic symbols (composition, terre/earth, extraction of dryness, cementation, fire).

Percepshrooms
Note: This section is in regards to a non-canonical subject, as it is only seen in a story by Stan, and does not really exist in Journal #3.

The page under a black light.

Most of what has been seen of this page is what the author wrote in invisible ink, including the title of the page and several sketches done on top of previous sketches done in regular ink. The left page shows cross sections of the percepshrooms. There is a drawing of several slices of the percepshroom, with an arrow pointing to a drawing of a mortar and pestle. One cross section has a skull drawn over it in invisible ink and an arrow pointing to it saying:

Do not eat!
The right page has drawings of the whole percepshroom, most of which have a brain drawn over the mushroom head. The largest drawing of the percepshroom has an arrow pointing towards it saying:

Maximum brain power!
To the right of the main percepshroom, the author wrote:

Mind augmentation
There are two brains drawn in invisible ink, one smaller than the other. There is an arrow pointing from the smaller brain to the larger one and text written under each drawing (respectively):

Normal brain
Super brain!
Machine page
S2e7 fuel gage.png
The left page has a drawing of three (human) figures, one going into an unknown location (possible portal), while attached by a rope to another figure. The third figure is standing by the second, arms outstretched with an arrow pointing from its arms to the first figure. Below it is a diagram of the portal, similar to the one seen in Grunkle Stan's hidden room underneath the Mystery Shack. The right page has a drawing labeled "Fuel Gauge," including dials drawn beneath the gauge.

Alchemic symbols: fire of circulation

Security Room
Main article: Bunker

All the symbols in the room.


The escape code.

The Security Room is a room in the author's bunker which leads to the lab area. The walls slowly close in on the person who steps on the middle pad and the right symbols must be pressed in order for the lab door to appear. The journal shows the correct code under black light.

Way out?
fig. C

fig. B diamond clusters
____ ____ the ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ sequence. End ____ ____ math ____

system ____ ____
SECURITY ROOM
KEEP OUT INTRUDERS
The outer system is designed to confuse any potential intruders during security breach.

One false move and unauthorized persons will be destroyed.
Spells

The Spells page

The Spells page includes a spell to awaken the dead, as noted on the accompanying left page. Although the book says "Daminium," Dipper reads it as "Domnius." The spell roughly translates to "Bodies rise, devil dominion, world change (or world master)."

fig A. Undead Potion
____ ____ ____ ____ curse #7 ____ ____
Zombie curse →
Right page:

Spells
62
fig B Spell volumes
DO NOT READ ALOUD!
fig C Stonehenge
Corpus levitas Diablo Daminium

Mondo Vicium
Alchemic symbols: cementation, composition, terre/earth

Squash with a Human Face and Emotions

Squash with a Human Face and Emotions.

While looking for ideas to defeat Gideon, Dipper calls this page "Butternut squash with a human face and emotions" instead of just "squash."

Squash with a Human Face and Emotions
Symbol cipher - D.pngSymbol cipher - O.pngSymbol cipher - N.png'Symbol cipher - T.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - E.pngSymbol cipher - A.pngSymbol cipher - T.pngSymbol cipher - Space.pngSymbol cipher - H.pngSymbol cipher - I.pngSymbol cipher - M.png
He's Gourd-geous!
SEEDS with WARTS
(FUTURE GENERATIONS OF PUMPKINMEN!)
Stomach-Faced Duck

Stomach-Faced duck

When Dipper showed the government agents his journal, this page was seen but the two quickly dismiss Dipper’s claim.[4]

Stomach Faced Duck
The stomach faced duck was first found at a ____ lake

the ___ of ____ Lake, He ____ ____ ____ ____ deformed.

RESPONDS TO THE ____

Water ____ ____ ____ to the ____ fond ____
Alchemic symbols: fire of rotation, calcination

Trust No One and wheel page

Wheel page.

Left page:

Unfortunately, my suspicions have been confirmed, I'm being watched.
I must hide this book before He finds it.
Remember—in Gravity Falls there is no one you can trust.
TRUST NO ONE!
Right page:

???
Thirteen prying wheel found in the back of a literature book at the Gravity Falls library shows a number of interesting symbols and equations. The central eye denotes mystical power. Note that several different ____ and ____ appear.

What does it all mean?

Under blacklight.

In invisible ink, it is revealed the wheel is some kind of puzzle the author was trying to figure out. Sections of the wheel are filled in. And the author drew a frowny face in the middle. They make a note underneath that is underlined several times. On the left page, the words 'TRUST NO ONE' has been circled.

In "Not What He Seems" the right page was torn during the activation of the Universe portal.

Can't Sleep! Can't Sleep! Can't Sleep! Can't Sleep! Can't Sleep! Can't Sleep! Can't Sleep! Can't Sleep!
Is this right?
I just don't know anymore!
Alchemic symbols: preparation, reduction, reverberation

Truth Telling Teeth

Truth Telling Teeth.

Truth Telling Teeth
fig. 81 A

The teeth have ____ ____ ____ ____ effect brainwaves and (A) ____ ____ ____ ____ of ____ ____ ____. ____ truth ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____. (B) ____ ____

____ ____ ____ (C)
Buried 'neath the tree stump in the deep forest are Truth Teeth, which force upon the wearer the inability to lie.
On the right page is a map of where the tree is.

fig. 81 B
fig. 82

location
The Undead

Zombies

The book has details regarding "the undead" (aka zombies). Including how to identify them, spells to resurrect them (see spells for more), and a cure for zombification; the only details of which Dipper describes as involving lots of formaldehyde and cinnamon.[4]

The Undead
Creature #6
EXTREMELY DANGEROUS!!!
Right page:

RETURN LIBRARY BOOK!
6/11
fig. B Known for their pale skin and bad attitudes, these creatures are often mistaken for teenagers. Beware Gravity Falls' nefarious zombies".

[Crossed out] risen ___ ____ destroy all of humanity. The undead ______ ______ ___ watching __ ____ [Crossed out]

Under blacklight.

In invisible ink, it is revealed how to defeat them.

ZOMBIES HAVE A WEAKNESS!
PREVIOUSLY THOUGHT TO BE INVINCIBLE, THEIR SKULLS CAN BE SHATTERED BY A PERFECT THREE PART

HARMONY.
Unknown pages: photocopied pages
S2e1 photocopied pages.png
In "Scary-oke," Stan can be seen photocopying two previously unseen pages.

The left page contains drawings, possibly schematics of the universe portal. The right page has a topographic map and something similar to a masonic symbol.

Alchemic symbols: composition, pulverize, digestion, fusion

Various symbols
S1e1 book 3 strange runes.png
This entry has minimal written text but contains symbols from various unknown sources/alphabets. One discernible symbol system is alchemy, which includes: composition, pulverize, digestion, fusion, and coagulation. However, these symbols are seen in the episode Gideon Rises, where Stan Pines is seen entering the shown symbols to go to the portal's elevator.

Miscellaneous information
These are snippets gathered from the book, but a page hasn't been specified.

There is a cave behind the waterfall in Lake Gravity Falls.[5]
In Gravity Falls it is legal to marry a woodpecker.[6]
Appearance
Journal 3 appearance.png
Journal #3 has the main color of burgundy and has various rips and tears on the cover due to age, it has two gold lines on its spine and all four of its corners are gold. In the middle of the book, there is a gold hand with six fingers and the number 3 in the middle. On the back, it shows various alchemist symbols.

Monocle
Just inside the front cover, the book has a monocle attached to the journal via a cord. Its purpose was unknown until it is revealed in "Journal 3" that Ford attached it to the book so he could read with one eye because of a burning pain in his right eye (most likely a side-effect of Bill possessing him), and it has been used as a bookmark by Dipper as seen in "Irrational Treasure." In "Scary-oke," an eyepiece is seen attached to Journal 1 as well.

Page Order (from left to right)
Order listed from left to right. Each bullet point is a separate episode. Ellipses indicates possible pages in between.

Property of/Vol 3
June 18
Floating Eyeballs
Giant vampire bats
Gnomes
Cursed doors
Myself
My muse
Moth man
Beard cubs/portal potty
Scampfire/kill billy
Soothsquitos/steve
the invisible wizard
The adbominable/Barf fairies
Leprocorn
stomach face duck
Question quail/cowl/Hawktopus/woodpecker pecker
the bottomless pit
a bit of history
blendins letter
northwest page
augest third
the great secret of the great flood
the undead
Spells
magic items
truth telling teeth
height altering
ghost
category 1 EH
category 2 Pranksters
category 3 gluttons
category 4 haunted paintings and image based spectres
category 5 soul suckers/category 6 phantoms of pain
category 7 the enternal key/category 8 the petrifying rock
category 9 dream hipster
category 10
Sightings
Intro: "Gravity Falls Main Title Theme"
Season 1
101. "Tourist Trapped"
102. "The Legend of the Gobblewonker"
103. "Headhunters"
104. "The Hand That Rocks the Mabel"
105. "The Inconveniencing"
108. "Irrational Treasure"
111. "Little Dipper"
113. "Boss Mabel"
114. "Bottomless Pit!"
118. "Land Before Swine"
119. "Dreamscaperers"
120. "Gideon Rises"
Shorts
6. "The Hide-Behind"
Season 2
201. "Scary-oke"
202. "Into the Bunker"
204. "Sock Opera"
206. "Little Gift Shop of Horrors"
207. "Society of the Blind Eye"
210. "Northwest Mansion Mystery"
211. "Not What He Seems"
212. "A Tale of Two Stans" (flashback)
215. "The Last Mabelcorn" (flashback)
217. "Dipper and Mabel vs. the Future"
218. "Weirdmageddon Part 1"
219. "Weirdmageddon 2: Escape From Reality" (pictured)
Games
Fright Night
The Twin Mystery Vortex of Doom
Trivia

The old gnome drawing.

In an early promo that aired on Disney Channel, the gnome page had a creepier but fairly more accurate drawing of a gnome.
This version of the gnome drawing is used in the replica journal that came with the Gravity Falls: Six Strange Tales DVD.

Journal in the pilot


(Left) The code to Stan's lab


(Left under The Undead page) There is page which was not written yet


Top "Little Dipper," bottom "Gideon Rises."

In the pilot episode the cover page of the journal was going to have a david's star instead of a six finger hand.
Various alchemist symbols of "fusion," "pulverize," "solution," "dryness," "extraction," "composition," "digestion," "coagulation," "reverberation," and "reduction" appear throughout the pages.
Together, "composition," "pulverize," "digestion," and "fusion" is the code Stan uses to enter his secret laboratory.
The back cover of the journal contains the symbols for: fire of rotation, strong fire, and smoke stream.
There's an animation error with Dipper's page; early in the first episode, when Dipper is showing Journal 3 to Mabel, Dipper's page can be seen, even though he hadn't written that page yet.
Both Journal 2 and Journal 3 have pages on zombies, as seen and heard in "Little Dipper" and "Tourist Trapped," respectively.
In addition, they both have pages on Bill Cipher.
Journal 3 shows signs of neglect as a result of its storage underground. When it was first seen, it was layered with dust, and 2 has small tears on the cover, while 1 is in a worse state, as it has larger tears.
The machine page in "Little Dipper" and "Gideon Rises" has different symbols in it. This was done to hide the code until it was ready to be revealed.
According to the real life Journal 3, there is no page detailing Percepshrooms, suggesting that Stan was telling the truth when he said he made up the story, and implying that either the Percepshrooms do not exist, or that its contents are actually in Journal 1, as Stan kept it hidden in his hidden laboratory for thirty years, so he likely read it through multiple times. Stan likely only read the pages in Journal 3 that had information on the Interdimensional Portal.
In the real life Journal 3, some pages are written by Mabel, although she has never seen writing in the Journal in the series. The pages that she has written are about the events that occurred in "Carpet Diem" when she was in Dipper's body and the events of "Sock Opera."
In the episode "The Hand That Rocks the Mabel" there is an animation error; Dipper is shown to be reading Journal 2 despite the fact later in the episode it was shown to be in the possession of Gideon.
In Rick and Morty's episode "The Rickshank Rickdemption" a Morty in the background may be seen carrying a book very similar to the Journal. This is not likely to be a coincidence, since the series -and that very same scene- have several Gravity Falls easter eggs.
Journal 3 is said to be the most important item of the entire Gravity Falls series.

Stan Pines
VIEW SOURCE
Star.pngStanley Pines

Background information
First episode
Tourist Trapped
Last episode
Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls
Voice
Alex Hirsch
Grey DeLisle (altered voice)[1]
Stuart Allan (as young Stan)[2]
Declan J. Krogman (as young Stan)[3]
J.K. Simmons (impersonating Ford)[4]
Inspiration
Alex Hirsch's grandfather, Stan[5][6]
Character information
Full name
Stanley Pines[3]
Other names
Stanford Pines
Steve Pinington
Stetson Pinefield
Hal Forrester
Andrew "8-Ball" Alcatraz
S618 (prison number)
Age
60s (birthday June 15th)
Occupation
Owner of Mystery Shack (former)
Mabel's agent [7]
CEO of StanCo (formerly)
Affiliations
Mystery Shack
StanCo (formerly)
Survivors of Weirdmageddon
Goal
To be wealthy[8]
To rescue his brother (fulfilled) [9]
Home
Glass Shard Beach, New Jersey (formerly)
Dead End Flats (formerly)
618 Gopher Rd, Gravity Falls, Oregon
Relatives
Ford Pines (older twin brother)
Click "expand" for full list

Pets
Compy (a Compsognathus) (former)[10]
Shanklin (a possum) (former)[11]
Allies
Dipper Pines
Mabel Pines
Ford Pines
Soos Ramirez
Wendy Corduroy
Enemies
Ford Pines (former)
Click "expand" for full list

Likes
His family
Waddles
Money
Dislikes
Gideon Gleeful (formerly)
Bud Gleeful (formerly)
Pioneer Day
Powers and abilities
High intelligence
Charisma
Boxing skill
Weapons
His fists
Brass Knuckles
Baseball Bat
Smoke Bomb
Fate
Went travelling near the Arctic ocean with Ford
Quote
"When life gives you lemons, call them 'yellow oranges' and sell them for double the price."[12]
[Source]
Stanley "Stan" Pines (born June 15, 15 minutes after his twin brother, Ford Pines)[13], also known as Grunkle Stan, and formerly under the assumed identity Stanford Pines[9][3], is Dipper and Mabel Pines' great uncle and summer guardian and a paternal uncle of Mr. Pines. After many years of crime and infamy, he has taken up residence in the remote town of Gravity Falls, Oregon,[14] where he exploits local lore and the gullibility of the "dumbest people in the world"[15] to finance himself by running a dubious tourist trap known as the Mystery Shack. Despite his initial claims of skepticism to the supernatural,[16] he is later revealed to be deeply connected with the paranormal and about the town's weird paranormal status,[17][18] most notably the decades-long operation of an interdimensional portal[17] he used to rescue his twin brother, Ford Pines.[9] He is the tritagonist of the series. Stanley is represented on the Zodiac wheel as the crescent symbol present on his fez.

Contents
1 History
1.1 Early life
1.2 During the twins' visit
1.2.1 Season 1
1.2.2 Season 2
2 Personality
3 Appearance
4 Relationships
4.1 Dipper Pines
4.2 Mabel Pines
4.3 Soos Ramirez
4.4 Wendy Corduroy
4.5 Gideon Gleeful
4.6 Ford Pines
5 Sightings
5.1 Season 1
5.2 Shorts
5.3 Season 2
5.4 Games
6 Quotes
7 Trivia
8 Gallery
9 References
10 Site navigation
History
Early life

A young Stan explores his hometown alongside his brother.

Stanley Pines was born on June 15th between 1952 and 1954 to Filbrick and Caryn Pines in Glass Shard Beach, New Jersey, about 15 minutes after his twin brother Ford.[14][2] He was raised Jewish, but now identifies as atheist.[19]He and his twin brother Stanford were very close. Stan's strong, brawny personality combining well with Ford's brilliance: when together, they were an unstoppable pair. Stan also faced frequent bullying due to his weak appearance as a child, most notably from childhood foe Crampelter. This eventually inspired their father to force the twins into taking boxing lessons, as a means of toughening them up and giving them the strength to overcome their tormentors.


Stan and Carla "Hotpants" McCorkle.

Stan's teenage years were initially pleasant, frequenting the 50's-themed Juke Joint with then-girlfriend Carla McCorkle [2] and building their ship - named the Stan o' war - with Ford, as they hoped to fulfill their childhood dreams of sailing around the world searching for adventure. His aspirations began to crumble near the end of senior year, when Stanford's intellect attracted the interest of West Coast Tech (a prestigious college on the other side of the country, which meant he'd move away from him), and with Carla ending their relationship over her infatuation with hippie musician Thistle Downe. Stan would later confess to having driven Downe's van into a ravine in an act of revenge, which only served to further alienate Carla from him.[2]

On the verge of losing his closest friend, barely passing high school and seemingly destined to stay in Glass Shard Beach forever, Stan took his frustrations out on Ford's infinite motion machine, accidentally damaging it and causing its malfunction. As his Toffee Peanuts bag was found at the machine's display, Ford accused Stan of sabotage, driving a wedge between the twins and prompting their father to disown Stan for losing them the "potential millions" Ford's scientific achievements would've reaped. With no friends or family to turn to, a furious Stanley set out on his own, determined to acquire fame and fortune twice the size his twin ever would've earned.


Stan's fate as a salesman is destined for disaster.

After a failed foray into combing beaches for buried treasure, Stan founded Stan Co. Enterprises. Through his self-managed company, Stan made and sold a variety of cheap and poorly-constructed household utilities, from Stan Co. Pitchforks (whose heads tended to fall off) to the "Sham Total" sham towels, both of which resulted in Stan Co. Enterprises, along with Stan himself, being banned from the state of New Jersey. The process repeated itself in Pennsylvania with his rash-inducing "Rip-Off" band aids. After the failure of his "Stan Vac" vacuums, Stan expanded his business out of the country, resulting in a heist gone awry in Colombia [20], which landed him in one of the country's prisons alongside cellmates Jorge and Rico. Stan attempted to bond with them, much to both prisoners' intense dislike.

Upon his release, Stanley returned to the United States. Banned from 32 of the 50 states, imprisoned in three different countries, reduced to renting a room at the Dead End Flats motel, and remaining in debt to Rico, Stan's life had seemingly hit rock bottom - until the arrival of a postcard from his brother Stanford, the first he had heard from his twin in over 10 years. It contained a desperate plea for Stan's presence.


Stan confronts Ford minutes before his disappearance.

Stan traveled to his brother's new home in the woods of Gravity Falls, Oregon, to find Ford confined in his shack and borderline insane with paranoia. Ford then revealed his underground laboratory and the Universe Portal to his brother, vaguely explaining that its powers were too dangerous and that he needed Stan to take one of Ford's journals, which contained information as to its operation, and go as far away as possible to protect them from falling into the wrong hands. Furious that Ford had only summoned him to send him away again, Stan initiated an argument and prepared to burn the book to spite Ford, causing a fistfight between the two. During the brawl, which caused Stan to burn his back on one of the symbols in the machinery, the device was inadvertently activated, and Stan unintentionally pushed his brother into the portal's range, sending Ford through the dimensional rift before its immediate shutdown from lack of fuel. Stan spent the following weeks plagued by insomnia and guilt, cloistered in the lab in an attempt to turn the portal on and bring Ford back again, only to realize it was hopeless without the other two journals.


The people of Gravity Falls are desperate to see Stan's "home."

Upon venturing into town once the food ran out, Stan discovered the locals were curious about Ford's house, and even willing to pay for a look, which prompted him to open it up for tours, building fanciful faux-paranormal props when Ford's inventions failed to garner interest. With Stan's witty remarks and jokes to liven the visits, the house eventually attracted enough popularity to become the Murder Hut, and later the Mystery Shack, a tourist trap focused on 'paranormal' exhibits. Faking his own death in a car crash, Stan took up his brother's identity to remain legally in the property and pay Ford's mortgage; he boarded up Ford's old bedroom and hid access to the lab behind a vending machine in the gift shop. He ran the tourist trap during the day for profit, but by night worked tirelessly to locate his brother's hidden journals and reactivate the portal, hoping to one day bring him back home.[3]


Stan's feelings for Li'l Gideon have already grown sour.

As the years rolled by, Stan applied countless renovations to his tourist trap, intent on keeping its oddities and appeal alive, both for profit and for his love of money. He once stole a collection of cursed wax figures from a local garage sale for this purpose, which became the Shack's Wax Museum of Mystery and was a huge success until Stan inadvertently forgot its existence. Edwin Durland was hired as a handyman for the Mystery Shack during this time; after firing him for his seeming incompetence, Stan caught sight of 12-year-old Soos Ramirez holding a screwdriver and offered him the job on the spot. Over time, the Shack developed a rivalry with the rest of the tourist traps the state, which originated a yearly tradition that involved vandalizing one another.

Sometime at the start of the summer of 2012, Gideon Gleeful opened up the Tent of Telepathy, a scam whose success (and whose ads, which often featured unflattering footage of Stan, damaged the Mystery Shack's profits) made Stan profoundly annoyed. The two soon ended up being business rivals.

During the twins' visit
Season 1

Stan welcomes his great-niece and great-nephew to Gravity Falls.

Sometime during the month of June of 2012, Stan's great niece and nephew, Mabel and Dipper Pines, are sent from Piedmont, California [21] to stay with him for the summer. Stan has them help out at the Mystery Shack, often working alongside his handyman Soos and his cashier Wendy. Stan is not above using the twins, as it happened when he planned a family bonding day that consisted of helping him create forged dollar bills, which resulted in the three being taken to county jail overnight. However, he soon seems to appreciate having the twins around: in "The Legend of the Gobblewonker," he is eager to take them fishing with him, even making them fishing hats with their names, and spends the rest of the day angrily upset at their choosing to go monster hunting with Soos.


Stan moping.

Finding his own fishing buddies around the lake doesn't turn out well for Stan, since everyone thinks his jokes are annoying or creepy to the point of earning him a tracking anklet from the lake police. Despite the bad day, the twins eventually return and join him in fishing for the rest of the day.


Stan tells the kids to avenge him.

After the twins and Soos rediscover the wax figure collection in "Headhunters," Stan resolves to reopen the exhibit, and is unhappy to discover Wax Abraham Lincoln was left in front of a window and melted in the sun. Mabel then uses this leftover wax to create a figure of Stan, which an adoring Stan unveils as a central part of the Wax Museum's Grand Reopening. The ceremony is ultimately a failure, as it was massively attended by a crowd that Stan promised free pizza to; the crowd grows angry and violent upon discovering there is no pizza.

Stan talks to and carries his wax twin around happily, but his joy is cut short when the wax figure is beheaded, an ax beside it and its head missing. Stan is emotionally affected by this (he calls the cops over the 'murder' and puts together an elaborate funeral for the wax figure), as having someone (or something) who looked like him beheaded brings back uncomfortable memories of the loss of Ford [22]. After failing to find the culprit, the twins, Soos and the wax figures attend Wax Stan's funeral, which is officiated by Stan; he is eventually overcome with emotion and leaves the room, with Soos close behind. In his absence, it is revealed that the murderers are the wax figures themselves, eager for revenge on Stan for forgetting about them for ten years - they'd mistaken the wax figure for Stan himself. Mabel and Dipper defeat them, destroying Stan's parlor in the process. When they tell Stan what happened, he laughs them off, telling them they have overactive imaginations.


Stan is threatened by his archenemy, Gideon.

In "The Hand That Rocks the Mabel," the twins and Soos watch a commercial for Gideon Gleeful, child psychic, which shows footage of Stan with the label "fraud" across it. Stan angrily informs them that Gideon is his arch enemy and has been nothing but trouble since he arrived in Gravity Falls. He also says nobody living under his roof is allowed under Gideon's roof, but Dipper and Mabel decide tents don't have roofs (a loophole) and go watch his show. When Stan learns that Mabel and Gideon are apparently dating, he marches over to see Gideon's father, Bud Gleeful, intent on complaining about the relationship and declaring himself against it. He is soon converted into a fan when Bud presents him with elaborate plans for an alliance between the Tent of Telepathy and the Mystery Shack, which would involve a lot of profit. After that, Stan takes to wearing a 'Mabel and Gideon' t-shirt and tells his niece she'll eventually have to marry the little boy, also spending his days having expensive food, drink and admiring expensive art at the Gleeful residence.

When Gideon orders his father to call off the deal on account of Mabel refusing to be his girlfriend, Stan is reluctant to part with all the luxury. As he is being dismissed, he grabs an expensive clown painting and runs from the house, yelling "Try and catch me, suckers!"

In "The Inconveniencing," Stan fails to find the remote control (and refuses to get up), forcing him to watch an old romance film called The Duchess Approves, which to his surprise ends up captivating him. He becomes very invested in the movie, ignoring the ringing phone and crying when a part of it reminds him of his life "in a way". When the fictional Count Lionel appears to interrupt the Duchess' wedding, Stan becomes so infuriated at the count's behavior that he tosses the television out through the window.


Stan gets Lazy Susan's phone number.

When Stan takes the twins to Greasy's Diner in "Dipper vs. Manliness," Stan's awkwardness around waitress Lazy Susan reveals to Mabel that he has a crush on her, although Stan claims she's too "classy" to ever give him the time of day. Mabel tries to improve Stan's appearance and behavior in order to appeal to his love, but nothing works. Mabel finally decides that she should present her uncle to Susan as is: the plan works like a charm, and Stan is rewarded with both Susan's number and a slice of pie on the house. However, Susan's incessant phone calls quickly become too much for Stan, who eventually stops answering, listening to her messages on the answering machine with horror instead.

Stan hosts a party at the Mystery Shack in "Double Dipper" to attract a younger audience. For profit, Stan charges both an entrance fee and an exit fee (of 15 dollars); he is immediately aware of the moment Dipper tries to leave the concessions table, turning up with a taped recording of his grand nephew promising to stay at it all night. He is baited away from the refreshment table (where he is filling a dish with marshmallows) and the dance floor by a dollar attached to a fishing line, courtesy of Dipper clone number 8.


Stan spends most of Pioneer Day trapped in a pillory.

In "Irrational Treasure" it is revealed that Stan despises the old-fashioned customs of Pioneer Day. Pretending to be living in pioneer times gets on his nerves, to the point where he assaults Steve, a mechanic, when Steve pretends to not know what a car is while Stan's car is stuck. He is subsequently locked in the stocks. While he is incapacitated, Stan encounters Gideon, who takes advantage of Stan's captivity to throw tomatoes at his face after Stan tells him he looks "less girly than usual". Pacifica Northwest also comes across Stan as he attempts to pick the lock with a hairpin[23], and tells him to write a statement claiming that the Northwests are the best family in Gravity Falls in exchange for his freedom. Stan instead writes "You Stink", prompting Pacifica to summon the townsfolk and have him pelted with tomatoes once more. He is released when Dipper unlocks him with the President's Key and Mabel, appointed a US congressman by Quentin Trembley, grants him official pardon.

In "The Time Traveler's Pig," Stan opens up a Mystery Fair to earn more cash and rigs the Dunk Tank (with himself as the dunkee, guaranteeing a lot of angry customers) by making the target connected to the seat very stiff, causing it to stay fixed no matter how hard the balls are thrown at it. Later, one of the members of the Time Paradox Avoidance Enforcement Squadron fires his blaster at the target, which causes Stan to fall off the seat and into the water, to the surrounding crowd's cheering .


Mabel forces Stan to face his fear of heights.

In "Fight Fighters," Stan is seen hanging out with Soos and the twins for a while before Robbie challenges Dipper to a fight. Stan hears the challenge, tells the boys to stay "right there" and rushes outside excitedly to witness the brawl, being disappointed when he can't call "the boys" to place bets - he transparently decides to bet on "Skinny Jeans" (Robbie). After reacting strangely to questions about ladders and screaming in terror at the "World's Most Terrifying Skydiving" show, Mabel realizes Stan is terrified of heights. She tricks him into climbing the Gravity Falls water tower with her in order to face his fear, when the tower's base is attacked by Rumble McSkirmish, who is pursuing Robbie at the time. After the tower wobbles unstably and threatens to fall with him and Mabel still on it, Stan discovers he is still alive, and realizes he has conquered his fear.


Gideon tries to shrink Stan.

In "Little Dipper," Stan opens the door to a man in a suit who asks for him by name. Terrified that the tax collectors have found him, Stan runs into the house for the bag of full of cash hidden behind a painting, looking desperately for a trap door button amidst the stones on the wall. The man in the suit then introduces himself as part of the "Winninghouse Coupon Savers Contest", come to give him $10,000,000 as soon as Stan signs his name on a document. Stan apparently acquiesces, stating his lifelong dream to "possess money" had finally come true, but when Gideon bursts through the check, gloating that Stan has just signed the Mystery Shack over to him, it is revealed that Stan actually wrote "SUCK A LEMON, LITTLE MAN!" on the dotted line. Stan thwarts several other schemes throughout the episode, so he is understandably skeptical when Gideon calls him, claiming he has the twins captive in a jar and demanding the deed to the Shack as ransom. He claims Gideon "isn't even speaking English" when he offers to text him a picture of the twins as proof, revealing he is not quite up to date with technology, and hangs up.

He and Soos are later seen setting up a mirror maze - Soos' idea, appropriated by Stan - that Stan expects will make him a lot of money. Stan is still deep in the mirror maze when Gideon arrives at the Shack with the shrinking device, which makes most of Gideon's shots divert harmlessly into mirrors, until he finally happens upon the real Stan. Unseen by both of them, the tiny Mabel and Dipper escape the jar and tickle Gideon into submission - to Stan, who only sees a previously threatening Gideon dissolve into giggles, this looks like a nervous breakdown. He suggests that Gideon may have overexerted himself with revenge and rolls his still giggly arch enemy through the Shack and out the door.


One of Stan's fruitless attempts to scare two trick-or-treaters.

In "Summerween," Stan drives the twins and Soos to the Summerween Superstore, and is the one who explains the holiday to Dipper and Mabel. When the store attendant tries to have them ejected from the store by the police, Stan uses a Smoke Bomb to escape, leaving behind a 'Stan Buck' as payment and demolishing a Jack-o-lantern float in the parking lot in the escape. It is revealed that Stan takes personal enjoyment in frightening trick-or-treaters away during Summerween: when a group rings the doorbell of the Mystery Shack, he comes to the door and feigns his face melting off. This scares all but two kids away; he tries to scare them by pulling 'real guts' (sausages) from his stomach, but fails. He then has pig burst out of his stomach, to no avail, and asks them what they find scary, which prompts them to prank him with a shock video on their cellphone. Stan is terrified and opts to call it a night, drawing himself a bath "wash off the shame". Unbeknownst to him, the two kids come into the Shack and wander into the bathroom, where Stan's half-naked form finally succeeds in scaring them away. When the twins come home from trick-or-treating, disappointed they couldn't eat any of the candy they collected, Stan presents them with the two kids' abandoned sacks of candy, and the family, along with Soos, Wendy, Candy and Grenda, watch a horror movie and eat candy for the remainder of the night.


Stan competing on the game show Cash Wheel

In "Boss Mabel," Stan's relentless attempts at making money and poor treatment of his employees get on Mabel's nerves, and she decides to confront him about it. Unwilling to believe Mabel's gentler methods are better than his ways, Stan proposes a bet: whoever makes more money in three days' time—Stan on vacation or Mabel running the Shack—is in charge for the rest of the summer. After heading out, Stan lands a spot competing on the game show Cash Wheel by being dramatic and shameless. While his blatant disregard for the rules earns him $300,000 dollars, Stan eagerly seizes the chance to go 'double or nothing' with a final puzzle: unfortunately, as the mystery word is 'please', Stan fails to guess and loses everything. This, coupled with the twins making a little money compared to his zero, prompts him to hold up his end of the deal. While Mabel turns down the job, she still makes him perform the apology dance he promised to do if he lost the bet.


Stan falls into the bottomless pit.

In "Bottomless Pit!," Stan is giving Soos and the twins a tour of the bottomless pit, where they go to dump things they want to get rid of. A storm breaks out, but an eager Stan stays to throw all the Mystery Shack's suggestion slips down the pit, until a gust of wind knocks him, along with Soon and the twins, down into the abyss.

Inside the pit, they begin to tell stories to pass the time. In Dipper's tale, Stan makes fun of Dipper's frequently cracking voice, and develops an obnoxious, female voice after his nephew dumps a voice-altering formula in his coffee. In his own tale, Stan wins a major football game with the help of his robotic sidekick, thereby teaching a group of football players a lesson and winning a gigantic trophy. In Mabel's story, Stan attempts to teach a bear how to drive and easily cons the cops into believing that it is his doctor-mandated seeing eye bear. Mabel observes his excessive lying habit and grows more and more annoyed by it to the point of forcing him to be honest, via a set of Truth Telling Teeth. Stan's truthfulness is unfiltered, however, going from annoying to disturbing, until he almost admits to all of his crimes in front of the police. Mabel finally decides to remove the teeth from her uncle's mouth after he almost gets himself arrested. When the Bottomless Pit ends, depositing them all back outside the shack, Stan leans on its signboard, which breaks and tips him back into the pit.


Gideon steals Stan's chair.

In "The Deep End," on the hottest day of the year, Stan, Dipper, Mabel, and Soos go to the town pool to cool off. When Stan tries to sit in the ideal lawn chair, he is horrified to find that Gideon has taken it from him at the last minute. As he tries to forcibly remove Gideon, he is caught and put into pool jail for roughhousing, and Gideon foils his other attempts. Stan resolves to break into the pool after hours and spend the night on the chair, therefore beating Gideon to it; while the plan seems to work, Gideon reveals that he'd coated the chair in glue.


Stan holding the key to the room.

In "Carpet Diem," when Dipper and Mabel are fighting over a new room they found in the shack, Stan takes the key and tells them that whoever sucks up to him the most will get the room. He makes them run around and do chores and make things for him, all the while rewarding them with 'suck-up points'. After Dipper and Mabel switch bodies, he catches Dipper (Mabel) spying on the sleepover and thinks that Dipper is at 'that creepy age where you spy on girls', which prompts him to drag "Dipper" into his office to explain puberty and where babies come from with the help of an illustrated book, much to Mabel's horror. When she tries to sabotage Dipper by calling Stan a stupid old jerk, Stan is instead proud of "Dipper" for standing up to him, earning him the key.


Stan does a spit take when he hears the hidden message in Robbie's song.

In "Boyz Crazy," Stan can be seen storing canned meat in preparation for the apocalypse. He listens to Dipper talk about how Robbie got Wendy to go on the date with him mind control, which prompts him to share the story of Carla McCorkle leaving him for Thistle Downe. He accompanies Dipper in uncovering a hidden message in the song, and drives Dipper to Lookout Point to help him tell Wendy about it. When Wendy breaks up with Robbie, he calls it "a victory for every man whose hands are either too weak or fat to play a musical instrument." After Wendy gets mad at Dipper for asking her to go bowling, Stan tells Dipper that he could always just go bowling with him and that he was trying to do the right thing, even if he destroyed a relationship.


Stan punching the Pterodactyl in the face.

In "Land Before Swine," Stan is left in charge of Waddles as Mabel goes out shopping. He leaves Waddles tethered outside the Shack despite Mabel's warnings, and later has to witness the pig being taken by a pterodactyl. He invents a story about the dinosaur breaking into the Shack and forcibly taking Waddles from him after a fight to avoid the blame. When the group, en route to save Waddles, finds dinosaurs encased in tree sap, Stan eagerly plans to turn them into another tourist attraction. He also unwittingly confesses to leaving Waddles outside, leading to Mabel not speaking to him. Later, when he and Waddles split from the group, being circled by the hungry pterodactyl, Stan has a change of heart and fights to protect the pig, even punching the dinosaur in the face like he'd said he'd done in the story. He returns Waddles to Mabel, earning her forgiveness.


Stan after his mind is invaded by Bill.

In "Dreamscaperers," Gideon sends Bill Cipher into Stan's mind to find the combination to the safe containing the deed to the Mystery Shack. Cipher is prevented from doing so by the efforts of Dipper, Mabel, and Soos, so Gideon uses dynamite to blow open the safe. With the deed in hand, he then forces Stan and the others out of the Shack and has it demolished via a wrecking ball.

Stan and the rest of the family are forced to move in with Soos and his grandmother in following the events of "Dreamscaperers." He tries to convince the townsfolk that he was robbed of the Mystery Shack's deed after Gideon unveils his theme park project, to no avail. He is also strapped for cash without the Mystery Shack's tours for income, despite telling Dipper and Mabel's parents that they're actually set up at a four star hotel. He is forced to send the twins back to California; as he muses over his losses, a resounding bleep of interference from his hearing aid leads him to discover that Gideon was spying on everyone through his Gideon pins. He drives to the site of the Gideonbot's crash in time to reveal Gideon's secret camera feeds, irrefutable evidence that gets him the deed to the Mystery Shack back. It also leads to Lil Gideon's arrest.

Back at the Shack, when Dipper finally tells him about Journal 3, Stan laughs and seemingly dismisses the journal, asking to borrow it to collect ideas for the Mystery shack. However, it is revealed that Stan is in fact very interested in it: he takes the Journal to the underground laboratory, where it is revealed that he had Journal 1 all along, and that he likely took Journal 2, along with the deed to the Mystery Shack, from the pile of things he shook out of Lil Gideon prior to his arrest.


Stan thrilled with success.

Stan expresses joy at finally having the three[24] and puts together the unmarked pages, which are revealed to be the blueprints to the portal. With the full image finally at his disposal, Stan sets about activating it.

Season 2

Grunkle Stan comes to the rescue.

In "Scary-oke," Stan is still in the lab late that night, using the three journals to make the portal operational. He stays there until early next morning, when he gets up to head the Mystery Shack's grand reopening. He gives Dipper back his journal, claiming it was too boring to read but having secretly made copies of its pages. When two government agents show up to investigate a strange phenomenon they picked up on the radar, Stan insists that nothing is out of the ordinary, even attempting to bribe them. He discredits Dipper when he tries to interest the agents with the journal and confiscates the business card they gave him, hiding it in his room.

Later, at the Mystery Shack reopening after party, Stan is at the admissions table counting the money he's made, happy at the amount of people that showed up. He ends up catching Dipper in his room talking to the agents and angrily tells him to go enjoy the after party, as he'll be grounded immediately after. Stan himself leaves the party early to work on the portal, so he is underground when Dipper raises the dead. He becomes aware in time to run upstairs and save Dipper and Mabel from the zombies. Stan then reveals to the twins that he was never skeptical and only lied to avoid making them curious about the supernatural. He is shown in awe of discovering invisible ink in the journal. Once the zombies' weakness is revealed, he, Dipper and Mabel climb onto the roof to use the sound frequencies from singing karaoke to kill them. After the zombies are dealt with, he asks Dipper to promise that he won't use the book to go looking for trouble, only for self-defense. In return, he had to promise Dipper that he didn't have any other 'bombshell secrets': with the portal, his real identity and Ford in mind, Stan crosses his fingers behind his back as he promises.

In "Into the Bunker," he is seen giving orders to the construction workers as they fix the damage from the zombie attack. When one of the workers asked what caused this, he lied and said that "a big woodpecker" did it, before slipping the curious worker some money in exchange for not asking questions.

In "The Golf War," he, the twins and Soos went to Ye Royal Discount Putt Hutt. While there, they see Pacifica with her parents. She insults each of them and Stan whispers to Soos, "Is it wrong to punch a child?" Pacifica makes a fool of Mabel after she scores the shot Mabel missed. Mabel calls her out and asks her for a rematch after dark. Stan is thrilled to help Mabel and Dipper break in while he and Soos stand look out. Before they go in, Stan gives Mabel a gold trophy sticker for encouragement.

In "Sock Opera," Mabel enacted her impression of him with her Stan sock puppet while he sipped his coffee, trying to ignore her. He also makes a joke towards Dipper after seeing him with bags under his eyes. He is later seen at the puppet show alongside Soos and Wendy.


Stan facing off against Will E. Badger.

In "Soos and the Real Girl," he is seen trying to show off with his novelty coin dispenser, Goldie, to a kid. Because it was old and worn out, it leaked oil and made a loud screeching sound that made the kid run away in tears. Wendy suggests he throw Goldie away, which he declines until he slips and his arm gets caught in its mouth. Later, he tosses Goldie in the garbage by Gravity Malls after having a heartfelt moment. He follows some children into Hoo-Ha Owl's Pizzamatronic Jamboree, where he finds the arcade to be a nightmare. He spots an animatronic badger and thinks it'd be a great way to con others out of their money, to which he asks the manager to sell it to him. The manager, however, declines and insults him. Stan then vows to get the badger at all cost. The next day, Mabel and Dipper ask him if he's seen Soos, to which he comments he missed work for the first time ever. Later on, he steals the animatronic badger, but after .GIFfany takes control of the electronics, it attacks him and he is forced to face it. Despite being outmatched, he is able to dodge one of its attacks with it mistakenly hitting the garbage, turning on Goldie, which munches on the animatronics' arm. Not long after, the badger shuts down due to Soos stopping .GIFfany, although Stan believes it was Goldie and suddenly decides to go to Las Vegas with it. While they are there, they get married at a Wed and Breakfast joint.


Stan with no hands.

Stan tells three stories in "Little Gift Shop of Horrors." In the first story, Hands Off, he plays a major part. He steals a golden watch from the Hand Witch. Despite the Dipper and Mabel's warnings to return it, he ignores them. The next morning he wakes up with no hands. Though he tries to hide this fact from Dipper and Mabel by putting mittens where his hands would be, the mittens fall off and the twins find out anyways. Stan tries to get along without his hands but eventually decides to go and return the watch. After reaching the Hand Witch's cave with the twins, they all scream in the surprise of the many living hands in the cave. They fight off the hands but are subdued. Stan is willing to give her the watch back in exchange for his hands back, which she accepts. However, she tells him he has to kiss her to seal the deal, much to his dismay. Refusing, Stan decides to leave, and the Hand Witch confesses that she's "desperate" to get a date. After Mabel redecorates her cave, the Hand Witch gives Stan his hands back. She then asks him to be her boyfriend. Stan refuses and admits that he learned nothing from the whole escapade.

In "Society of the Blind Eye," Stan continues to work in secret on the enigmatic machine beneath the Mystery Shack, accidentally cutting his hand on a flying pipe in the process. Bandaging his wound, he proclaims that he's come too far and that nothing will stop him.

In "Blendin's Game," Stan goes to Big Gunz Laser Tag with the rest of the gang to cheer up Soos. He exclaims that it used to be a mattress store. He is then seen in the end credits, in the past, where he fires a younger Deputy Durland for being the worst handyman ever and eventually hires a younger Soos.


Stan's failed attempt to reach out to younger people.

In "The Love God," Stan is working on a new exhibit when he notices the Woodstick festival's balloons, bikes, and folk singers. Panicked, he instructs Soos to lock up and attempts to shoot down the balloons with a crossbow. Soos then stops him, pointing out that there is a potential for profit, and Stan deduces that he can appeal to the youth by advertising to them via a Mystery Shack-themed balloon. Later, when Stan and Soos send off their poorly-made balloon, it terrifies the crowds, ultimately crashing on Love God. When the people see Stan, they panic, and he welcomes their fearful reactions.

In "Not What He Seems," Stan struggles with the idea of telling Dipper and Mabel the truth about what he is doing, but is suddenly arrested and brought in by the government agents for interrogation. Later on, it is revealed that Stan has used fake identities and may be an entirely unknown person, and it is shown that the actual Stan Pines had died in a car crash. At the end of the episode, Stan convinces Mabel not to turn off the Universe portal. Afterwards, a man walks out of the portal, and is revealed to be the long-lost twin of Stan; Ford, the author of the journals.

In "A Tale of Two Stans," Dipper, Mabel, Soos, and Ford corner Stan in the basement of the Mystery Shack, Stan tells his entire past to explain everything to his relatives and Soos. After Stan's tale they hear the government agents about to break in the basement until Dipper grabs out the Memory Eraser from the Blind Eye Society and gives it to Ford, who connects the gun's power to the outside and erases the agents' memory and makes them leave. The Stan brothers later have a talk. Ford says that Stanley can have the Mystery Shack for the rest of the summer and Stanley tells Ford to stay away from Dipper and Mabel saying that they're his only family left.


Stan, Mabel, and Grenda set out on their quest to save Dipper and Ford.

In "Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons," Stan tells Dipper that his brother is dangerous and should be avoided. Later in the episode, Stan and Mabel (who are joined by Grenda afterwards) prepare for the season finale of Duck-tective, but without warning, they find Dipper and Ford playing Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons board game in the TV room. To their dislike, the two new bounding friends take up the entire room with their game, Stan then argues with Ford for the right of the room, then which out of anger, Stan throws the bag containing the infinity sided die on the floor, by doing this he unwillingly sends the main characters from the board game into Gravity Falls' dimension. As soon as unleashed Probabilitor the Annoying and his servants kidnap Dipper and Ford and bring them to the forest so that Probabilitor can eat their brains to gain their intelligence. Stan then decides to help Grenda and Mabel save Dipper and Ford from getting their brains eaten, but to do so the group must travel to Probabilitor's base camp and defeat him in a game of Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons "real life" edition, in which Dipper and Ford must face Probabilitor's characters, two ogres. Stan and Mabel win the game, Probabilitor and the others are forced back into their own realm, and Dipper and Ford are broth out of the game. Stan then tells Dipper that if he wants to hang out with Ford he won't get in his way. After a day's work Stan, Mabel, Dipper, and Grenda go watch the Duck-tective season finale's second showing.


Stan competes against Bud Gleeful in the town's mayoral election.

In "The Stanchurian Candidate," Stan wants to make a name out of himself since everyone sees him as some dumb old man or less than his brother, so he decides to run for mayor against Bud Gleeful. Since his first speech was a total failure, Dipper turns to Ford to help him. Ford gives him a tie to control Stan's mind. Dipper and Mabel use this tie to make Stan the perfect candidate. Stan later realizes that it has been controlling him the entire time so he decides to never wear it. But his decision only makes things worse. He goes back to being the worst candidate and with Gideon controlling Bud. Bud starts to win the election. Later, Stan sees Dipper and Mabel falling out of the statue of Mayor Befufftlefumpter's nose and goes to save them, by saving the twins' lives he successfully wins the election. Later that day Stan hears that he hasn't won the election because of his criminal record, so Tyler wins instead.

In "The Last Mabelcorn," Stan is seen speaking to a man named Santiago about smuggling barrels of pugs over the U.S. border. When Ford gives Mabel a crossbow, Mabel accidentally shoots the crossbow outside the shack and Stan mistakes it for the police. Later, when the girls put a treasure chest overflowing with gold on the table, Stan runs towards it, shouting "money!" and taking most of the gold.


Darlene traps Stan in her web.

In "Roadside Attraction," Stan takes the twins, Soos, Candy, and Grenda on a RV trip to sabotage various tourist traps across Oregon. When he notices Dipper having a hard time forgetting about his crush on Wendy, he gives him advise on how to be confident with girls, which works out extremely well for Dipper at first. When Dipper approaches Stan with feelings of uneasiness due to Candy's sudden attraction to him, Stan decides to make an example of how confidence can get girls with a woman named Darlene. As Stan flirts with Darlene, she reveals herself to be a "spider-person," and she captures Stan in order to eat him. Stan calls for Dipper to help over his walkie-talkie, and Dipper along with the girls go to rescue Stan. After being rescued, Stan confides in Dipper that he really isn't that smooth with women. The gang return to the Mystery Shack, only to see it vandalized by the vengeful owners of the tourist traps they destroyed.

In "Dipper and Mabel vs. the Future," Stan joins the twins and Soos in the excitement for the upcoming week as his senior ponytail kit arrives on the coming week, stating he is going through some things. When the twins and Soos prepare for their birthday party, Stan forbids them from throwing a party due to their previous party incident, with Stan finding zombie pieces around the Shack. After Mabel becomes saddened over the summer ending, Stan comes to comfort her, telling Mabel that while summer is ending, Mabel still has Dipper around to be with her, telling his niece that not everyone can say their siblings are there for them.

In "Weirdmageddon Part 1," Stan makes a brief appearance as he's in the forest putting up signs until Gompers eats the tassel of his hat. As he gets angry at Gompers, a weirdness wave hits Gompers and turns him gigantic, causing Stan to run away screaming from the gigantic goat.

In "Weirdmageddon 2: Escape From Reality," Dipper, Mabel, Wendy, and Soos approach the Mystery Shack to find shelter. Inside, Dipper hears noises and the group proceed inside and find Stan as well as a number of people and creatures taking refuge within the Shack due to its protection from Bill.


Stan relaxes inside the protected Mystery Shack.

During "Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls," after reuniting with the twins, the Mystery Shack is scouted by an Eye-Bat. When the Eye-Bat leaves, Stan explains that after realizing the Mystery Shack is immune to Bill's powers, McGucket took all the remaining refugees into the Shack to escape Bill, Stan then appointed himself Chief and decided that the best course of action was to wait until they run out of supplies and eat the gnomes as backup. Dipper attempts to get Stan to help rescue Ford from Bill but Stan shrugs it off commenting that Ford should get himself out of the mess. He then persuades Dipper and Mabel to simply stay inside the Shack as it is the safest place to be in. Stan watches with the other refugees as Shandra reports about what happened to the citizen of Gravity Falls. Dipper and Mabel encourage everyone to fight against Bill but Stan objects as the Mystery Shack is the only safe place and there was no way to bring it to Bill. McGucket suddenly has an idea as to how they could fight Bill but Stan remained pessimistic.

When everyone takes a break from building McGucket's plan, Stan rants to Shmebulock about the resistance's plan. Dipper and Mabel ask Stan why he's upset, and he admits to being angry that Ford never thanked him for his efforts to bring him back to their dimension (as well as Ford's folly causing Weirdmageddon in the first place). He laments that he's always seen as "the screw-up" while Ford's always "the hero." Dipper and Stan argue, but Mabel quickly breaks the argument and reassures the two that everything will turn out fine.


Stan refuses to shake Ford's hand unless he thanks him.

Stan is next seen inside the Shack-tron, stating it was a bad idea as the Shack is surrounded by Bill's henchmen. He is then sent inside the Fearamid to help rescue Ford. When all of the citizens of Gravity Falls are returned to normal after toppling Bill's throne, Dipper asks Ford about Bill's weakness, which he tried to tell Dipper about before being initially frozen. Ford then draws the Zodiac and tells everyone who matches a sign to stand on their sign and hold hands. However, Stan refuses to join the circle, as it would require him to hold Ford's hand- and he won't until until Ford thanks him. Ford grudgingly does so, and the ritual seems to work- however Stan and Ford bicker over Stanley's grammar, and break the circle. Bill approaches the group and turns everyone on the Wheel but the Pines into tapestries. Bill attempts to persuade Ford to help him but Dipper and Mabel distract Bill. Stan and Ford are imprisoned while Bill chases the younger twins.


Stan and Ford reflect on what went wrong with the bond they used to share.

Stan grieves over the kid's possible deaths, believing it his fault because he "couldn't shake [Ford's] stupid hand." He laments his belief that that his dad was right about him-that he really is a screw-up. A saddened Ford tells him it wasn't his fault- he himself was the one who originally made a deal with Bill and fell for his easy flattery, and claims Stan would've instantly "seen him for the scam artist he is." Stan and Ford have a brief moment to reflect on their childhood and how they were once as close as Dipper and Mabel. Ford, believing all hope is lost, tells Stan that he'll let Bill inside his mind and get the equation needed to completely take over the universe if means the children will be safe. Stan disagrees with the plan, asking if there's any other solution. Ford brings up the fact that, while he could simply erase Bill with the memory erasing gun once he steps into his mind, the metal plate in his head prevents Ford's mind from being erased. Stan gives an alternative solution- what if Bill went into his mind instead?


Stan sits back as his mindscape becomes consumed by fire.

When Bill returns, Ford appears to surrender, agreeing to let Bill inside his mind on the condition that he lets Stan and the kids go. However, when Bill enters the mindscape and opens the single door there, he's shocked to find Stan waiting there instead. Stan reveals that he and Ford switched clothes and faked each other's voices, tricking Bill into making a deal with the wrong person- and leaving him vulnerable to the memory erasing gun's effects. In the physical world, Ford begins erasing Stan's memories to erase Bill along with them, while Stan defeats Bill with a single punch from within his mind. Stan, looking at a photo of himself with the twins, comments that he was "good for something after all" before becoming engulfed by the blue flames consuming his mindscape.

With Bill's defeat, everything in Gravity Falls returns to normal- but it's a bittersweet victory. Ford, Dipper and Mabel are saddened by Stan's sacrifice, with Ford lamenting the fact that Stan has no idea that he saved the world (as well as Ford), calling Stan "our hero" as he hugs him.


Dipper and Mabel attempt to jog Stan’s memory by sharing stories of their summer.

Ford, Dipper, Mabel and Soos then take Stan back to the ruined remains of the Mystery Shack. Stan doesn't remember the place, but slides easily back into his favorite chair. Seeing everyone's distraught faces, he asks why everyone seemed downed, claiming that it's "like [they're] at someone's funeral." Mabel, frantically trying to find some way to bring him back despite Ford's insistence that he's gone, finds her Summer Memories scrapbook. After the children's failed attempt to jog his memories using it, Waddles licks Stan and Stan subconsciously calls him by name. When Soos tells the twins to skip to his page to make Stan remember him, Stan also calls Soos by name, telling him not to try giving himself a raise just because he has amnesia, making everyone happy that Stan is slowly recovering his memories as Mabel reads from the book.

When the town of Gravity Falls return to their normal lives, Shandra reports that Stan has fully recovered his memories and is celebrating Dipper and Mabel's 13th birthday (and final day in Gravity Falls.) At the party, Ford takes Stan aside and tells him about a new anomaly near the Arctic Ocean. Ford wants to investigate, but feels he's too old to go it alone. Stan asks if Ford wants someone to go with him on an adventure of a lifetime, but Ford doesn't want just someone to go with him, but Stan himself, showing Stan a old picture of them together on the Stan o' War as children. While Stan and Ford seem happy about their new adventure, Ford questions what to do with the Mystery Shack in their absence.

After a hushed conversation between himself and Ford, Stan announces to the town that the Mystery Shack will shut down for good, as Stan and Ford have catching up to do and will be away for quite some time. Soos quickly objects, stating that his own dreams will be shut down should the Mystery Shack close. Stan states that no one would be around around to run it, but then quickly takes it back, telling Soos he found someone perfect to run it, and gives Soos his fez as he announces that the Mystery Shack is "under new management."


Stan and Ford fulfill their childhood dream.

The next day, Stan joins with Soos, Ford, Wendy, and Mabel's friends in saying farewell to his niece and nephew. Stan makes an excuse about wearing Mabel's Goodbye sweater and, along with Ford, silences Soos when he brings up how hot it is to be wearing a sweater. When the bus arrives, Waddles appears and wants to go with Mabel, but can't because her parents won't let her bring him back with her (as well as the bus not allowing pets) Stan gets upset and tells Mabel that he lived with Waddles all summer, and now Dipper and Mabel's parents will have to. When the bus driver attempts to remove Waddles from the bus, Stan and Ford threaten the bus driver into letting him stay. Stan says goodbye to the twins one more time, attempting to hide his emotions from them. Mabel says they'll miss him too. Stan joins everyone in shouting their final goodbyes to Dipper and Mabel, he is then approached by his twin brother and the two look as their niece and nephew depart. In Dipper's monologue, Stan and Ford are seen venturing the ocean and fighting a giant squid on their new boat, the Stan o' War II. After the two defeat the squid, they huddle and laugh.

Personality

Grunkle Stan running away with a cash register.

Grunkle Stan is at first sight a wise and cunning salesman, running a tourist trap in a town with enough unsuspecting customers to sell worthless knickknacks to and take on tours of so-called "mysteries." He conducts his business with surprising flair and wit.[16] When not planning or executing money-making schemes (both legal and illegal), he's usually at home watching television. His preferred shows include Cash Wheel, Duck-tective and period dramas. He also enjoys fishing.

Stan is also manifestly greedy and selfish, even stating once that his greatest desire in life is to "possess riches" [8]. He sees tourists as easy cash and nothing more.[16] However, this obsession seems to stem from his father's words when he kicked him out of the house, and by the harsh, poverty-stricken life he led after being disowned.

While his trickery might appear unremarkable to some, Stan's cunning transcends his Mr. Mystery persona: he's been able to figure out Lil' Gideon's plots on numerous occasions [25] and even manages to outwit Bill Cipher in the end. Even though he was written off as unintelligent by his teachers and even his father, he was capable of restoring his brother's universe portal, and can be seen operating its computer in the days leading up to Ford's return..


Stan envisions tourists as sentient wallets.

Stan has a deep sense of family loyalty. He responded to Ford's request for help after an entire decade of being estranged, and was deeply hurt when he realized his brother didn't intend to make amends, even calling him out on how bad a brother Ford turned out to be. He dedicated thirty years of his life to bringing Ford back to their dimension in spite of how strained their relationship had become in the years leading up to the fight. Stan is also shown to be very protective of Mabel and Dipper, despite the morally ambiguous situations he puts them in on occasion: he stood up to hoards of reanimated corpses to protect them, telling the zombies nobody (but him) harassed his family, and ditched the elections for mayor at a crucial moment to rescue the twins as they dangled from Mayor Befufftlefumpter's monument. When he believes Ford might put Dipper and Mabel at risk, Stan has no qualms about warning his brother away from them.

Stan's dedication to his family is outright expressed during Weirdmageddon, when he offers to obliterate his own mind to ensure the twin's survival. Once he and Bill are trapped in his mindscape, Stan points out to the increasingly frantic demon that, while he's a wise guy, he made a fatal mistake: he messed with Stan's family. His final thoughts before his mind disappears are for Dipper and Mabel, even remarking that his mind was finally 'good for something' if its destruction protected them.

Despite his lengthy history as a con artist, he has a compulsion to state his honest opinions on the subject at hand. Some examples include: during "Headhunters" Stan stated to the man who sold him the cursed wax figures that he would just rob him later on for charging twenty dollars per statue, and has blurted out "non-specific excuse" to get out of a bad date. He even admits in "The Stanchurian Candidate" that he has little to no filter between his thoughts and his words.

Appearance

Partial of Stan's burn mark (above) and from Stan's desk (below).

Grunkle Stan appearance.png
Stan has brown eyes[26] with cataracts,[27] gray eyebrows, and gray hair (Both of which were brown in his youth), that is almost always covered by Stan's trademark maroon fez, which bore a yellow crescent shape (through episodes 1 to 13) and later a similar figure (after the original fez was eaten by Gompers), albeit with straight edges and a dot next to it, resembling an oyster with a pearl in it. He bears a somewhat large, droopy, pear-shaped, bumpy, reddish-pinkish nose, large ears, and fair skin. As a result of his age, Stan has wrinkly skin, a hearing aid, and dentures [1]. He has a faded burn mark of the symbol on the side of Ford's desk on his back. He usually wears a pair of rectangular glasses with a black rim which later had its outline thinned. Stan also has a perpetual five o'clock shadow covering his lower face.

Stan's typical outfit is a black suit, with the jacket buttoned closed, a bow tie similar in color to his fez, and a white dress shirt. He also wears big, light brown shoes, the aforementioned fez and his glasses. He frequently carries an eight ball cane with him and often wears an unnecessary eye-patch over one of his eyes while working. He has mentioned that he owns a girdle [1], which he'd presumably wear while in the suit; this would explain why his prominent belly doesn't show in this outfit.

Around the house, Stan wears a white wife beater, a gold chain, striped blue boxer shorts, slippers, and his glasses and fez. This outfit reveals Stan's vast amounts of body hair, burly arms, skinny legs, and his very large belly.

FezDesignChange
A comparison of Stan's fez designs.
S1e11 Grunkle Stan Without Fez
Stan without his fez.
S1e12 grunkle stan
Stan in his less formal attire.
S2E12 Mr. Mystery
Stan as Mr. Mystery over the years.
Relationships
Dipper Pines

"Is this a hug?"

Dipper is Stan's great-nephew. Stan does not often supervise Dipper as he is supposed to as the boy's summer caretaker, and is known to hand unpleasant duties to Dipper in particular, angering the boy and even leading him to question Stan's affection for him on occasion. Stan often takes delight in teasing him over his size and his nerdiness [8], which greatly annoys Dipper.[1] Stan finds Dipper's intellectual interests boring and difficult to empathize with. However, Stan seems to have a soft spot for both of the twins, [28] and is well-meaning in his treatment of his great-nephew [29] [interview]: Dipper reminds him of his younger self and how he was often preyed upon by bullies. Stan believes that making him do hard things will toughen him up and teach him to stand up for himself.

Stan is proud when Dipper stands up to others, including him, and has been shown to empathize deeply with his nephew's girl troubles, offering his help with them whenever possible. While he tends to become jealous when the boy finds others more fun or likable [27] (particularly when the someone is Ford[9]), he comes to understand that Dipper finds it easier to connect with Ford. After the incident with the Dungeons, Dungeons and More Dungeons game, he decides not to stand in the way of Dipper bonding with Ford, understanding that Dipper needs someone with similar interests around.

Mabel Pines

Mabel and Stan fishing.

Mabel is Stan's great-niece. Mabel's sweet, accommodating disposition and love of aesthetics often clash with Stan's forceful methods and sloppiness, occasionally leading to self-improvement attempts that Stan nevertheless goes along with tolerantly (like curing his fear of heights [30] or overcoming his inability to speak with then-crush Lazy Susan [30]). Stan can be protective of his niece [31] and, as with Dipper, he will get jealous when she spends time with others instead of him [27] or expresses admiration of Ford [9]. Stan appears baffled by and unwilling to participate in Mabel's more flamboyant plans, sometimes refusing to acknowledge that she is up to something weird [32] or opposing her worldview entirely [33]. He seems more capable of understanding Mabel than Dipper, often joining her in teasing Dipper and sharing interests (like their love of Duck-tective). Stan notably has nicknames for Mabel (calling her 'sweetie' and 'pumpkin') whereas he has only referred to Dipper as 'Dippy' in writing. This ease in showing emotion for Mabel could be due Stan not feeling the pressure of having to toughen her up for the world.

This doesn't make Mabel exempt from his schemes, as she is shown to be involved as often as Dipper is.

Soos Ramirez

Soos compliments Stan's idea.

Soos is Stan's handyman. Stan views Soos as a loyal employee, since he's been working at the Mystery Shack for many years, and he isn't above taking advantage of Soos' haplessness on occasion (like passing off Soos' ideas for his [8]). He is aware of Soos' unwavering admiration and trusts him to follow his orders to the letter, as evidenced by Stan tasking him to guard the vending machine while he was taken into custody. While he is sometimes exasperated by the young man's immaturity, Stan genuinely cares for his employee. He is aware of Soos' aversion for his birthday and confessed that he tried to have it removed from the calendar altogether, revealing the lengths he would go to in order to spare Soos' feelings. At the end of the series, Stan transfers ownership of the Mystery Shack over to Soos.

Wendy Corduroy

Wendy does not comply with Stan's request.

Wendy is Stan's employee. [34] Stan is harsh on her, contributing to her view of him as the "worst boss ever", but this apparently stems from Stan's intrinsic knowledge of Wendy's personality, as he seems to know that she will slack off if he does not strongly enforce his rules. [34] She is not above playing pranks on him [35], which Stan appears to take in good humor if he has not fired her yet. He is also relatively tolerant of how she sometimes openly disregards his requests.

Gideon Gleeful

Gideon nearly succeeds.

Stan and Gideon have been rivals for years, both in business and life. Stan initially sees Gideon as a nuisance [31], annoying but ultimately harmless [8] [35], until Gideon unleashed Bill Cipher upon them and stole the deed to the Mystery Shack. As this resulted in Stan nearly losing his livelihood and the twins, his enmity with Gideon grew, with Stan treating the boy like a force to be reckoned with. The final status of his relationship with Gideon is unknown, but it is presumed that they buried the hatchet after Weirdmageddon, as Gideon is seen thanking "all y'all" (presumably referring to the Pines family) during the twins' 13th birthday party.

Ford Pines
Ford is Stan's twin brother. Inseparable as children, Stan was protective of his physically weaker twin, standing up to bullies for him and being wholeheartedly accepting of Ford's six fingers, even incorporating them into their personal salute (the "high six"). He seemed proud of his brother's brilliance at first, happily joining him in the celebratory picture when Ford won the Science Fair and shamelessly copying off of him at school. When Ford's intelligence began to provoke negative comparisons and threatened to end their plans of sailing the world together, Stan began to feel threatened, which led to teasing and belittling on his part; these emotions culminated in Stan venting his anger at losing his brother on the infinite motion machine, unintentionally causing it to stop, destroying Ford's college plans. This caused Ford's refusal to intervene on his behalf when their father disowns him.

While Stan would hold a grudge about this for many years to come, he does not forget his brother. He calls Ford at least once, though Stan hangs up without saying a word, and kept a picture of them at boxing practice taped to his car's shade. He is also quick to seek Ford out once his brother sent him a postcard requesting his presence in Gravity Falls. Believing he'd been called to make amends, Stan lashes out in anger when Ford reveals he intends to make his brother go as far away from him as possible, which results in the fight that sends Ford through the portal. Stan is distraught at this turn of events, spending sleepless nights with Ford's journal and glasses in hand. [3]

Issues between them not withstanding, Stan spent the next thirty years relentlessly trying to figure out how to reopen the portal and bring Ford back. When Ford does return, Stan is eager to welcome him back amicably, and is taken aback when Ford responds with a punch to the face instead. Stan quickly turns to resenting him when Ford refuses to thank him for bringing him back, mostly ignoring him and becoming jealous when the twins display any kind of admiration for his brother.

Stan's issues with his brother come to a head during Weirdmageddon, with Stan becoming increasingly resentful of the survivor group's focus on recovering Ford, as he interprets this as undue admiration towards Ford rather than a way of discovering Bill Cipher's weakness. In the Fearamid, Stan is reluctant to go along with Ford's plan, only agreeing to join the Zodiac Wheel after Ford thanks him. Ford's petty correction of Stan's grammar gets Stan agitated, leading to him attacking Ford, which disbands the wheel and causes it to fail.


Amnesiac Stan being embraced by Ford.

While imprisoned by Bill, Stan and Ford are finally united in their distress over Dipper and Mabel. They reflect on their failings and what went wrong with the bond they used to share; while they discuss this, they come up with the plan to lure Bill into Stan's mind. While posing as Ford for the deal with Bill, Stan includes that Bill let his brother and the kids go as a condition to let him in.

Once Stan's mind is erased and Bill is destroyed, the now amnesiac Stan does not react to his brother hugging him and calling him a hero, as he doesn't know who either of them is.

After his memory is fully recovered, Stan is deeply moved when Ford asks him to come along on his hunt for anomalies, as it represents fulfilling their childhood dream of sailing the world together. He seems to welcome Ford's comfort when he is sad after Dipper and Mabel leave, and they are later seen battling a giant squid together and sharing a laugh once it leaves, their bond clearly restored.

Sightings
Intro: "Gravity Falls Main Title Theme"
Season 1
Every episode of Season 1
Shorts
1. "Candy Monster" (mentioned)
2. "Stan's Tattoo"
6. "The Hide-Behind"
7. "Mabel's Guide to Dating"
8. "Mabel's Guide to Stickers"
9. "Mabel's Guide to Fashion"
10. "Mabel's Guide to Color"
11. "Mabel's Guide to Art"
12. "Fixin' It with Soos: Golf Cart"
13. "Fixin' It with Soos: Cuckoo Clock"
14. "TV Shorts 1"
15. "TV Shorts 2"
16. "Mabel's Scrapbook: Heist Movie"
17. "Mabel's Scrapbook: Petting Zoo"
Season 2
201. "Scary-oke"
202. "Into the Bunker"
203. "The Golf War"
204. "Sock Opera"
205. "Soos and the Real Girl"
206. "Little Gift Shop of Horrors"
207. "Society of the Blind Eye"
208. "Blendin's Game"
209. "The Love God"
211. "Not What He Seems"
212. "A Tale of Two Stans"
213. "Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons"
214. "The Stanchurian Candidate"
215. "The Last Mabelcorn"
216. "Roadside Attraction"
217. "Dipper and Mabel vs. the Future"
218. "Weirdmageddon Part 1"
219. "Weirdmageddon 2: Escape From Reality"
220. "Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls"
Games
Fright Night
Oddity Creator
Mystery Shack Mystery (mentioned)
Postcard Creator
Rumble's Revenge
Mystery Shack Attack
PinesQuest
Li'l Gideon Shrinks Back
Disney Channel Holiday Starglobe
The Great Stanmobile Escape
Gravity Falls: Legend of the Gnome Gemulets
Waddles Food Fever
Puzzle Ninja
Take Back The Falls (game)
Quotes
"Wanna hear a joke? Here goes. My ex-wife still misses me, but her aim is gettin' better! ... Her aim is gettin' better! ... Y'see, it's-it's funny because marriage is terrible."
—Stan Pines[source]

"Sounds like something a responsible parent wouldn't want you doing... Good thing I'm an uncle! Avenge me, kids! AVENGE ME!!!"
—Stan Pines[source]

"I'm givin' none of this to charity!"
—Stan after earning 500,000 dollars on Cash Wheel[source]

"When there's no cops around, anything's legal!"
—Stan Pines[source]

"At the end of the day, Summerween isn't about candy or costumes. Or even scaring people. It's a day when the whole family can get together at one place and celebrate what really matters: PURE EVIL!"
—Stan Pines[source]

"No buts except yours out the door! Now shut your yap and get to work!"
—Stan to Mabel[source]

"Remember folks, we put the 'fun' in 'No Refunds!'"
—Stan Pines[source]

"I don't understand! What did I do that warrants this much arresting?!"
—Stan Pines[source]

"Hey, look at me. Turn around and look at me, you one-eyed demon! You're a real wise-guy, but you made one fatal mistake: you messed with my family."
—Stan to Bill Cipher[source]

"Huh, guess I was good for something after all."
—Stan before his memory is erased[source]

Trivia
The name "Stanley" means "Stony Clearing." "Stanford" means "Stony Meadow."
Stan was raised Jewish but is now an atheist.[19]
Stan is called "Grunkle Stan" by Dipper and Mabel because he believes "Great Uncle" takes too much time to say, and, according to him, time is money.[36]
"Grunkle" was chosen because Hirsch's great aunt, Lois, used to insist on being called "Graunty Lois."[37]
Beginning with the episode "Bottomless Pit!," Stan gets a new fez design.
At the end of the previous episode, "Boss Mabel," Stan's fez falls off and Gompers tries to eat it. Although the fate of the hat isn't revealed, it's not unlikely that Gompers won the battle and made off with the fez, forcing Stan to get a new one.
In some countries, the first symbol on Stan's fez is removed.
This was initially the version that was seen on Disney+, which caused controversy among fans and Hirsch. The symbol was restored sometime later.
Excluding Waddles, Stan is the only main protagonist not to be turned into something that isn’t human; Dipper and Mabel were turned to wood, Ford turned to gold and Soos and Wendy were turned into banners.
Stan owns 10 guns.[30]
He has been sent to jail in Colombia.[31] As Revealed later in Soos and the Real Girl, this is due to a Heist gone wrong.
He is often seen running away with various items.[28][31]
He is similar to Scrooge McDuck from Ducktales and Mr. Krabs from SpongeBob as he has an obsession with money like them.
When dressed in his typical outfit, Stan's appearance is simular to British comedian and magician Tommy Cooper, who also wore a fez, black suit and bowtie.
Stan, Mabel, and Dipper have been to the county jail due to them making counterfeit money during one of Stan's "family fun days."
In "A Tale of Two Stans," it was revealed that Stan has a sibling, Shermie, who is Dipper and Mabel's grandfather. Although it isn't stated outright, it can be inferred from the fact that Stan shares last names with Dipper and Mabel that Shermie is the latters' paternal grandfather.
Toffee Peanuts are Stan's favorite treat.[38]
In "Gideon Rises," it is shown that Stan wears a hearing aid.[17]
Bob Odenkirk of "Breaking Bad" fame was originally going to be cast as Stan, but he turned the offer down.[39]
Stan wears the same necklace as Sheriff Blubs, Sergei, and the carney who gives Wendy the Stuffed creature of indeterminate species, but they wear them under their shirts.
In "Bottomless Pit!," Stan admits to the police that he has violated the Lacey Act.
In "Dreamscaperers," it is revealed that his belly button is an innie.
Stan's appearance has not changed in at least a decade.[40]
Stan is banned from airplanes.[40]
Every depiction of Stan (wax sculpture, puppet, photo, or otherwise) has been "killed" in some way and most deaths have been related to fire or melting.
The 'deaths' of Stan's depictions may have foreshadowed his showdown in the mindscape with Bill.
Stan was born 15 minutes after Ford, making him the youngest twin, however he is taller than his twin.
Stan was revealed to know swear words in "Not What He Seems", making him and Old Man McGucket the only characters to ever swear for real.
Stan's real name was hinted in the episode "The Legend of the Gobblewonker" on his cars license plate which is 'STNLYMBL' which is presumably a shortened version of "Stanley-Mobile"
Stan has a box of fake IDs and passports. Some of said IDs are:
Hal Forrester. Idaho ID. His appearance is slightly altered, including the presence of a mole. The number on the card is: [[1]]
Andrew "8-Ball" Alcatraz. Mississippi ID. His appearance is altered, including a scar on the left side of his face, and a soul patch. He is wearing the gold necklace. He also doesn't wear glasses. The number on the card is [[2]].
Stetson Pinefield. United States passport. His appearance is slightly altered, including different hair style and white shirt. Visa stamps include London, Seattle.
Steve Pineington. He advertised the Rip Off, a non-sticky bandage that gave you rashes, in Pennsylvania.
All the fingerprints on Stan's right-hand exhibit a double loop whorl pattern.[9]
"Northwest Mansion Mystery" is the only episode in which Stan doesn't appear.
According to Bill Cipher, Stan's burn mark means "watch your step."[41] It is revealed in "A Tale of Two Stans" that Stan got this mark after being kicked by Ford and stumbling backward into hot metal.
In the original pilot, Stan is in his eighties. In the series, he is in his sixties.[36]
Stan was divorced from a woman named Marilyn only six hours after being married.
Stan has no children.[42]
"Stan legal," "Precise Legal." [43]
He has been practicing the same coin trick since 1982 and still can't master it.[44]
In "Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls," it is revealed that Stan can do a perfect vocal impression of Ford.
Stan has used Ford's identity twice, with Ford using his only once.
Stan wants his body taxidermied and placed like it's about to pounce on the Mystery Shack when he dies.[45]
He got into a fist fight with Stan Lee in 1973 according to Lost Legends.
When he was twelve, Stan wore Groucho Marx Glasses at his Bar Mitzvah, which upset his father.[46]
During the "ULTIMATE CROSSOVER FUNDRAISER!" charity livestream, where Alex Hirsch, Dana Terrace, Rebecca Sugar, and Ian Jones-Quartey drew and sang for The Trevor Project, when asked what Dipper, and Mabel would be as Gems, they answered the following (and then did Stan's too):[citation needed]
Mabel - Cherry Tugtupite. On her chest, where her heart would be.
Dipper - Larimar. On his head, possibly in the shape of his birthmark.
Stan - Pyrite (also known as fool's gold). Mirrored to Stan's tattoo on his back, which indicates vulnerability. This was actually suggested by the chat, which was wholeheartedly agreed upon by everyone else.

Wax Realistic Grunkle Stan Head

Stan's appearance of his face changed between season 1 and season 2. In season 1 his face, most notable his chin is much longer then it appears in the second season. His ears also appear bigger in season 2.
Alex Hirsch owns a realistic Stan head made of wax created by KreatureKid.
Alex Hirsch mentioned in the episode commentary that Ford and Stan are identical twins.
Polydactyly, or having extra fingers, is caused by genetic mutation. Since identical twins share exact genomes, and since Ford is polydactyl and Stan is not, it is possible that Ford's polydactyly is not genetic.
Curator Ponds, a character from Gravity Falls' storyboard artist Matt Braly's Disney Channel show Amphibia, is a direct homage to Stan and hinted by Braly and Hirsch to be a Stan from another dimension. Mr. Ponds (a pun on "Pines") is a frog voiced by Hirsch and accompanied by Frog Soos.
The name "Grunkle Stan" is a reference to the common national personification of America, "Uncle Sam".

Bill Cipher
VIEW SOURCE
Star.pngBill Cipher

Background information
First episode
Tourist Trapped (pictured)
Dreamscaperers
Latest episode
Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls
Voice
Alex Hirsch
Inspiration
Eye of Providence
Creature information
Creature №
326
Species
Dream Demon
Abilities
Apportation
Click "expand" for full list

Weaknesses
Memory Gun
Zodiac
Quantum destabilizer
Shielding Spell
Anything that harms his eye
Other names
Muse
Click "expand" for full list

Goal
To rule all of reality and existence.
Home
Unnamed two-dimensional dimension (formerly)
Nightmare Realm
Family
Unnamed parents†[4]
Friends
Gideon Gleeful (former)
Click "expand" for full list

Enemies
Ford Pines
Click "expand" for full list

Likes
Conjuring into whatever form people fear the most
Chaos
Partying
Destruction
Dislikes
Synthesized music[2]
Deals being called off
Magic symbol named Kryptos[5]
Weapons
The ability to manipulate
Fate
Erased from existence inside of Stanley Pines' mind (unsure); physical form permanently petrified.
Quote
"Remember! Reality is an illusion, the universe is a hologram, buy gold, BYE!"
[Source]
Bill Cipher was a triangular inter-dimensional demon, formerly existent only in the mindscape before succeeding in gaining access to the real world. He had been running amok in Gravity Falls, Oregon since being summoned by Stanford Pines over thirty years ago, and was also known for his mysterious demeanor and sadistic humor. Bill is the main antagonist of Gravity Falls, although he doesn't play a central role in the series until his first physical appearance in the penultimate Season 1 episode, "Dreamscaperers.", he has background parts, such as the rug in the mystery shack that has a triangle with one eye, and the triangle window in "Tourist Trapped".

Contents
1 History
1.1 Background
1.2 Events of Gravity Falls
1.3 Season 1
1.4 Season 2
2 Potential Return
3 Personality
4 Appearance
5 Summoning ritual
6 Preventing Bill's chaos
7 The Cipher File
8 Journal 3
9 Abilities
9.1 In the Mindscape
9.2 In Physical Form
10 Cameos
10.1 Season 1
10.2 Season 2
10.3 Outside of Gravity Falls
11 Sightings
11.1 Season 1
11.2 Shorts
11.3 Season 2
11.4 Games
12 Quotes
13 Merchandise
13.1 Plushes
13.1.1 Deluxe Bill Cipher Plush - $59.99 USD
13.1.1.1 Voice Lines:
13.1.1.2 Bill Cipher Plush - $9.99
13.1.1.3 Angry Bill Cipher Plush - $9.99
13.2 Toys / Figures
13.3 Posters
13.4 Keychains / Lanyards
14 Trivia
15 Gallery
16 References
17 Site navigation
18 Site navigation
History
Background
Trillions of years prior to the events of the series, Bill Cipher originated from the second dimension. Bill despised living there, describing it as a dimension of "flat minds in a flat world with flat dreams." He "liberated" his dimension by plunging it into burning chaos, along with everyone he'd ever known, including his own parents. [4] He eventually took over a boiling, shifting intergalactic foam between dimensions: a lawless, unstable crawlspace known as the Nightmare Realm. Unfortunately, due to the Nightmare Realm's lawlessness and lack of any consistent physics or rules, it was fated to collapse into itself eventually. [6] After coming to learn of a prophecy that stated he would merge the Nightmare Realm with the third dimension, Bill started coming into contact with humans to accomplish this.


A prophetic painting of Bill's defeat.

Without a physical form, however, Bill could only access the dreams of the third dimension's beings. In order to make his dealings with mortals easier, he took on the name "Bill Cipher" as his real name would "evaporate one with an expression of horror and ecstasy on their face." [7] Among his targets were the natives who lived in what would become the town of Gravity Falls, Oregon.

Bill once asked a local shaman named Modoc the Wise to build an interdimensional gateway to the Nightmare Realm, but the result was made out of twigs. When Modoc learned of the prophecy that foretold of an apocalyptic event that would stem from interactions with Bill Cipher, he lit himself on fire in an effort to avert it.

The natives eventually discovered a way to defeat Bill by using a zodiac with ten symbols. They left behind elaborate cave paintings about their encounter with the demon, including how to summon him, and more importantly, a warning never to read the incantation that would summon Bill aloud. The valley was deemed a "cursed land" by the natives, who evacuated around 1000 AD. [8] The area would eventually be rediscovered by Quentin Trembley and repopulated by pioneers, giving rise to the town of Gravity Falls.


Bill tricks Ford into building a gateway to the Nightmare Realm.

In the late twentieth century, a young man named Stanford Pines, who had spent the past six years investigating the town's plethora of unnatural creatures and oddities, hit a roadblock in his research and was left without answers as to how the improbabilities of Gravity Falls had come to be. During the roadblock, he uncovered the ancient cave containing the ancients' stories of Bill Cipher. Heedless of the warnings, Ford repeated the incantation aloud, summoning Bill into his mindscape. Bill recognized Ford's brilliant but cocky and insecure nature, and his near-friendlessness as ideal conditions for manipulation, choosing to introduce himself to Ford as a muse who chose one brilliant mind every century to inspire.

It was Bill who revealed to Ford that Gravity Falls' weirdness was caused by a rift between dimensions, through which the other side's weirdness leaked through. With Bill's assistance, Stanford drafted blueprints to create an inter-dimensional gateway beneath his home and recruited his college friend Fiddleford McGucket for assistance. As Bill and Ford's partnership seemingly grew to friendship, Ford seemed to develop an obsession with Bill's powers, collecting triangular memorabilia such as rugs and statues, modeling his home's architecture in his image, converting his private study into a place of worship. He even allowed the demon to enter his mind; this, along with the amount of information he seemed to simply produce on the spot, made Fiddleford increasingly uneasy of the portal and of Ford's mysterious collaborator, as Ford never mentioned Bill's identity to his partner.


Bill reveals his true nature and ultimate plans to Ford.

On January 18, 1982, Ford and Fiddleford performed their first trial with the active portal, which quickly went awry, as the rope that was attached to the dummy they intended to send through the portal became tangled with Fiddleford, sending him briefly through the portal head-first. Upon his return, an alienated Fiddleford muttered incoherencies before uttering a prediction about "the beast with just one eye." In Gravity Falls: Journal 3, it is revealed that Fiddleford saw Bill removing his exoskeleton to feed. He promptly abandoned the project.

The suspicion planted in him by Fiddleford led to a confrontation between Ford and Bill, during which Ford learned that Bill had tricked him, as the portal was meant to act as a gateway to the Nightmare Realm, allowing the demon to bring chaos and destruction into their universe. Horrified and betrayed, Ford shut down the project and attempted to destroy all knowledge of the portal, before accidentally falling through it himself. Bill either could not see Ford in the thirty years he spent lost in other dimensions or didn't care to, as Ford would remark that they had not seen each other in many years. With the loss of his human pawn, Bill also lost physical access to the third dimension.

Events of Gravity Falls
Season 1
Bill's likeness is often seen in the series, as each episode contains 'hidden triangles' and even images of Bill himself, such as in "Fight Fighters", can be seen.


Bill's entry in Journal 2.


Bill's entry in Journal 3.


Bill gives Gideon a little present of death.

"Dreamscaperers" is the first time Bill is directly addressed and introduced in the series. In an attempt to take over the Mystery Shack once again, Gideon Gleeful summons Bill. Gideon tells him to steal Stan Pines' safe combination directly from his head so that Gideon can steal the Shack's deed. Bill agrees, but in return, Gideon would have to help him in his own plans, which are not revealed to the viewer. Gideon agrees immediately and the two shake on it. Unbeknownst to Gideon, Mabel and Soos witnessed the deal in the forest, and get Dipper's help to follow him into Stan's mind.

Once inside Stan's head, Bill confronts the trio and brags that he knows what they're all thinking. To prove his statement, he summons Xyler and Craz from Mabel's imagination. He tricks Mabel and Soos into looking for the memory of Stan's safe combination first, knowing they'd lead him straight to it. At some point, Soos is separated from everyone else, and Bill takes his place. Once they find the correct memory he takes it and nearly escapes with it. But while he reads the combination out loud to Gideon (to whom he is connected), Mabel shoots the memory door into another memory of the bottomless pit with a nyarf dart. Gideon breaks off the deal, to Bill's fury. Bill turns his anger toward Mabel and Soos by bringing their nightmares to life and killing Xyler and Craz.


"I'll be watching you."

Dipper returns in a timely manner and tells Mabel and Soos that while they are in Stan's mindscape they can do whatever they want. They battle Bill and he is nearly defeated. Just as though it seems he will be forced out of Stan's head, he puts a stop to everything instead. Impressed, he decides to let them go, and after warning them of a mysterious darkness that will change everything they care about, he tells them that he'll be watching them. He leaves in a representation of the zodiac, almost identical to the one that appears in his entry in Journal 2.

Season 2

Bill (left) in Dipper's body, alongside a surprised real Dipper (right).

Bill Cipher appears again in "Sock Opera," when Dipper is trying to figure out the password for the laptop from "Into the Bunker." He offers the laptop's password in return for a favor, but Dipper refuses the offer. Later, at the moment the laptop is on a countdown for complete data erasure after too many failed password entries, he appears again and Dipper accepts the deal of trading a puppet to obtain the password.

Bill takes over Dipper's body as his "puppet" and destroys the laptop. He then follows Mabel to her puppet show in pursuit of Dipper's journal, which is being used as a prop in the show. After Mabel has been informed of Dipper's body having been stolen by him, he finds her with the journal as she is retrieving it for Dipper. He almost swindles her out of it but ends up in a fight with her. He ends up losing because Mabel uses Dipper's physical weakness and exhaustion to her advantage. As he collapses, he is thrust out of Dipper's body. Bill possesses the Dipper puppet afterward and says that he will return. However, Mabel activates the pyrotechnics of the play, destroying the puppets and removing any vessel Bill could use to talk to the kids.

In "Northwest Mansion Mystery," he appears on a tapestry hovering over a forest fire with two men either begging for mercy or worshiping him while skeletal corpses are underneath them, foreshadowing bad events.

At the end of "The Stanchurian Candidate," after a prison-bound Gideon fails to get his father elected mayor, he is shown to have drawn Bill Cipher's zodiac on his cell wall and hidden it behind a cat poster. The symbols on the zodiac have been changed around, and some have been altered. Gideon tears down the poster and completes the drawing by drawing Bill's eye before telling it he's ready to make a deal.


Bill deciding on who is to be his next pawn.

In "The Last Mabelcorn," Bill Cipher appears in one of Ford's dreams, telling him that he's been preparing for "the big day," going on to say that Ford can't keep the inter-dimensional rift safe forever. Bill throws a copy of the rift down to the ground, opening a red triangular portal in the sky and setting fire to Ford's mindscape. Ford yells at Bill to leave his mind, telling him he has no dominion in the real world. Bill leaves through the portal, telling Ford that "things change."

Far later in the episode, Bill appears in flashbacks as Ford explains his time spent with the demon to Dipper. In the past, Bill and Ford were partners. Bill could enter Ford's mind at any time, and with his help, Ford built the portal. However, after Fiddleford came out of the portal traumatized by the horrifying things he saw, which were Bill's actual plans, Ford realized Bill had lied to him. He confronted Bill, who revealed his plan to merge the Nightmare Realm he comes from with the real world, causing the apocalypse. Ford broke off his partnership with Bill then and there, despite Bill's warnings that he couldn't stop the rift from happening. Ford shut down the portal and swore never to trust Bill again.

At the end of the episode, Bill watches from the Nightmare Realm as Ford and Dipper manage to create a "Bill-proof" barrier around the Mystery Shack by using moonstones, mercury, and unicorn hair. Undeterred, Bill decides to possess someone outside the shack instead.


Bill possessing Blendin.

Near the end of "Dipper and Mabel vs. the Future," Bill approaches Mabel by possessing Blendin Blandin, recognizing Mabel's wishes of wanting summer to never end. Bill (as Blendin) convinces Mabel to give him the inter-dimensional rift, which he says can be used to create a "time bubble" that can make time stop. Mabel gives Bill the rift, which he promptly smashes with his boot. Bill reveals himself and leaves Blendin's body, knocking out Mabel with a snap of his fingers and initiating Weirdmageddon.


Bill gains a physical form.

In "Weirdmageddon Part 1," after opening the rift, Bill gains a physical form and imprisons Mabel in a bubble. He introduces himself to the people of Gravity Falls, claiming to be their new ruler as well as introducing his friends to the people. The townsfolk refuse to submit, but Preston Northwest welcomes him instead, offering to be one of his "horsemen of the apocalypse." Bill thinks about the offer but instead decides to disfigure Preston's face, creating fear in the people. He begins "redecorating" the town by unleashing Eye-Bats that petrify and abduct the townspeople, summoning the Fearamid, and sending out bubbles that instill madness in everything they touch. Bill recreates the opening theme song in the process.


Bill taunts Dipper.

When Bill and his friends prepare to cause havoc, Ford attempts to shoot Bill back into the rift with his quantum destabilizer but only hits his tophat. When Bill notices Ford and Dipper, he blasts the clock tower. Ford, pinned under rubble, begins to tell Dipper that there's another way to defeat Bill. He is cut short when Bill appears, towering over Ford. Bill captures Ford and presents him to his friends, telling them that Weirdmageddon wouldn't be possible without Ford. Bill makes an offer with Ford and tells him it's not too late to join his side. Ford refuses, so Bill turns him into a golden statue to use as a "back-scratcher." Dipper, who has gotten back to street-level, yells that he's had enough. Bill flies over to Dipper, asking the boy what he could possibly do to defeat him in one shot. Dipper flips through Journal 3, trying to find Bill's weakness. With no answers, Dipper panics, and leaps towards Bill, trying to punch him. In response, Bill creates a forcefield around his eye, knocking Dipper backwards, causing him to fly into a tree. Bill then telekinetically seizes the three journals, burning them in front of Dipper, with two crippled pages surviving. Bill tells 8 Ball and Teeth that they can eat Dipper for a snack. Bill then converts a random car into a sleek getaway ride for himself and his other friends. The car flies away to the Fearamid leaving Dipper, 8 Ball, and Teeth behind.

Bill and his friends are later seen having a rave party inside the Fearamid. Suddenly, the Time Paradox Avoidance Enforcement Squadron, Blendin Blandin, and the Time Baby barge in, attempting to arrest Bill for possessing Blendin and almost destroying reality. Bill vaporizes the Time Police and Time Baby instantly, and the party resumes. 8 Ball and Teeth approach Bill, informing him they failed to eat Dipper. They ask him if he's worried about Dipper freeing Mabel, but Bill says he's not concerned, and that he has "someone on the case."


Bill sitting on his throne.

In "Weirdmageddon 2: Escape From Reality," Bill has been in power for four consecutive days. Most of the townsfolk have been petrified and stacked into a "massive throne of frozen human agony" for Bill. He announces his plan to take Weirdmageddon worldwide, and the demons make their way toward the edge of Gravity Falls. But instead of escaping to the rest of the world, they hit a strange force field-like energy dome that keeps Bill and his chaos stuck in the town.

Later in the episode, Bill is angered and unable to understand why he and his friends aren't able to extend their reach and leave Gravity Falls to dominate the world. He realizes that Ford is the only one able to understand the shield and contemplates his next move. He is interrupted by Keyhole, who informs him Gideon, Mabel's jailer, has failed to stop Dipper, allowing him and his group to enter Mabel's bubble. Bill is not worried by this, calling Mabel's bubble one of his most diabolical traps yet. He asks for Gideon and tells Keyhole to take the day off.


Bill resolves to physically torture Ford until he lets him inside his mind.

In "Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls," Bill reverts Ford from his gold state. He explains to Ford that he, along with the rest of his friends, can’t escape Gravity Falls. Ford thinks that this is due to a natural magnetism attracting weirdness to Gravity Falls, the event he’s studied for years, a force so strong that it forms a barrier that prevents that weirdness from going outside the town. He says there’s a way to break this barrier, but he’d never tell Bill. Bill tries to persuade Ford by telling offering him unlimited power in a world without restrictions or laws. Ford again refuses, calling Bill insane. Bill decides to find the equation needed to break the barrier in Ford’s mind. However, Ford reminds Bill he can’t unless he makes a deal with him. Bill decides to try and find Ford’s weakness and force him to make the deal, chaining him up further.


Bill tries to destroy the Shacktron, but is prevented by the "Bill-proof" barrier.

Bill is later seen torturing Ford by blasting him with lasers until he agrees to his deal. Though Ford is in pain, he still refuses to give in. Before Bill can start torturing Ford again, he is interrupted by the Shacktron, a gigantic mech created by Old Man McGucket, with the help of Dipper, Mabel, and various townsfolk. They converted the Mystery Shack into a powerful machine to fight Bill and rescue Ford, who knows Bill's weakness. Bill finds it "adorable" that the refugees are fighting back, and orders his henchmaniacs to fight them. However, his minions are quickly defeated by the Shacktron, and Bill is upset as Ford congratulates Dipper and Mabel for their efforts. Bill realizes Ford cares about the twins, and wonders if torturing them will be more effective than torturing Ford. Bill turns Ford back into a gold statue and flies over to the Shacktron. He attempts to crush the Shacktron with a giant fist, but it remains intact thanks to the "Bill-proof" barrier surrounding the Mystery Shack. Bill becomes enraged and repeatedly punches the Shacktron. The refugees use the dinosaur attached to the Shacktron's left arm to tear out Bill’s eye and distract him. Realizing now is their chance to rescue Ford, a team composed of the twins, Stan, Soos, McGucket, Wendy, Pacifica, and Sheriff Blubs is ejected out of the Shacktron, using parachutes made out of Mabel's sweaters to land inside the Fearamid.

Everyone lands right next to the human throne, but Dipper is unable to figure out how to unfreeze everyone. Gideon Gleeful, trapped in a cage hanging from the ceiling, explains that Mayor Tyler is the load-bearing statue in the human throne, and if he’s pulled out, the whole throne will fall apart. When Dipper does so, it sets off a chain reaction. As the chair collapses, Gideon’s cage is knocked to the ground and breaks, freeing him. The residents are returned to normal, and Ford unfreezes as well. When Dipper and Mabel ask Ford what Bill’s weakness is, he explains that the way to thwart Bill is by using a zodiac with ten symbols. When each person that correlates with a symbol stands on a drawn version of the zodiac and they hold hands, it can create a force strong enough to vanquish Bill. Meanwhile, Bill is still fighting the Shacktron. It manages to pin Bill to the ground, but Bill realizes its legs aren't inside the unicorn barrier. Bill utilizes this weak spot to flip the Shacktron over, tear off a leg, and smash it into the Shacktron, sending it flying. Back in the Fearamid, the townsfolk that is not represented in the zodiac run away, leaving only Dipper, Mabel, Soos, Wendy, Gideon, Robbie, Pacifica, McGucket, Ford, and Stan. For a moment, it seems that they will be able to complete the ritual. However, after Ford corrects Stan on his grammar, Stan pushes Ford, breaking the link. The two begin to fight as Mabel and Dipper try to stop them. While they’re distracted, Bill looms above them, having beaten the Shacktron and regenerated his eye.


Bill turns everyone but the Pines family into tapestries.

Bill sends a wave of fire at them, burning the zodiac away. He also traps Stan and Ford, binding them with ropes. The resistance prepares to fight against Bill, but the demon snaps his fingers and turns everyone but the Pines into tapestries showing their screaming faces. Bill then imprisons Dipper and Mabel in a triangular cell. Bill says he’ll spare the twins if Ford lets him into his mind, giving him one last opportunity. The twins yell at Ford not to do it, causing Bill to angrily fly up to them. Mabel quickly takes out her can of spray paint and sprays Bill’s eye, distracting him again and freeing Stan and Ford. While Bill’s distracted, Dipper takes out his size-altering flashlight and enlarges the cell, making it so he and Mabel can walk through. He and Mabel goad Bill into chasing them down a long hallway. As Bill moves to follow them, Stan and Ford try to escape.

3E01835A-60F4-484B-8558-7D8F90933A92.jpeg
However, Bill places them inside a larger cell like the one he put the twins in. Bill then changes into a monstrous red and yellow form and chases the kids throughout the Fearamid, threatening to disassemble their molecules. After recapturing the twins, he gives Ford an ultimatum—let him into his mind, or one of the twins will be killed. Ford reluctantly surrenders as Stan objects. Bill removes the cell and ties up Stan. Ford’s only condition to the deal is that he lets his family go. Bill accepts as he shakes hands with Ford. Bill’s physical form turns to stone as his mental form goes inside Ford’s mind.


Bill vanishes from existence after being punched by Stan.

Bill was happy that inside Ford’s mind is "a perfect, calm, orderly void" (a bleak white landscape) with a single wooden door. When Bill opens it, he’s greeted by Stan playing paddleball inside the Mystery Shack. Stan reveals that while the demon was chasing Dipper and Mabel, he and Ford swapped clothes and pretended to be each other so that Bill would enter the wrong mind. In the real world, Ford takes out the Memory Gun, setting it to erase Stan’s memory completely. In the mindscape, Bill tries to call the deal off as the door shuts and the room becomes enveloped in blue flames. Stan explains Bill is going be erased by the Memory Gun, but the demon retorted, asking Stan if he realizes that his mind is also being destroyed. Bill tries to escape and resorts to bargaining with Stan, but Stan doesn’t budge because Bill's powers were erased. The man tells him that Bill's real wiseguy but made one fatal mistake: messed with his family. Bill explains that Stan's making a mistake and will give him anything that he would desire, until his form becomes heavily distorted as he speaks backward messages, and attempts to reach out to Stanley. He punches the weakened Bill into nonexistence as his mindscape becomes consumed by the flames caused by the Memory Gun. Following Bill's defeat, everyone trapped as the tapestries are freed. Outside the Fearamid, Bill’s henchmaniacs are sucked back into the portal, with the bricks of the Fearamid not far behind. The portal itself closes and explodes into a great shockwave, returning the entirety of Gravity Falls back to its own version of normal. The only thing that remains of Weirdmageddon is Bill’s petrified physical form.

After the credits, Bill Cipher’s petrified form is shown in live-action, isolated deep in a forest.

Potential Return
Although Bill was erased from existence by Ford and Stan, it is strongly implied that he can revive himself somehow, as shortly before disappearing he relays a distorted message that when reversed says:

"A-X-O-L-O-T-L! My time has come to burn! I invoke the ancient power that I may return!"

In one of the possible storylines of Dipper and Mabel and the Curse of the Time Pirates' Treasure!: Select Your Own Choose-Venture, Dipper and Mabel end up in "the time and space between time and space," where they encounter a creature called the Axolotl —a giant talking axolotl—, who lets each of them ask him a question. Dipper asks him "what [does he] know about Bill Cipher," to which he replies with a very revealing poem:

Sixty degrees that come in threes.
Watches from within birch trees.
Saw his own dimension burn.
Misses home and can't return.
Says he's happy. He's a liar.
Blame the arson for the fire.
If he wants to shirk the blame,
He'll have to invoke my name.
One way to absolve his crime.
A different form, a different time.
This suggests that, before being erased, Bill invoked the Axolotl to get redemption for his crime, and that there is one way to get absolved: he would have to take "a different form" in "a different time." That means that Bill could still be alive, paying for his crime. Though most of the book's content is non-canon because it follows a "choose your own adventure" format (it has many possible endings), this answer could be the "one enormous 'canon' secret" Alex Hirsch said it contains.[9] The encounter with the Axolotl ends with him sending Dipper and Mabel back in time, without any memories of what happened.

Bill's potential return is further implied in the Cipher Hunt, where Alex Hirsch warns the treasure hunters never to shake the statue's hand, even though he should be dead (Ironically, the group that found Bill shook his hand), as well as Stanley's final message to the hunters, beginning with him singing "We'll Meet Again" (what Bill sang in the finale) and even urging the hunters to shake Bill's hand in congratulation, implying that Bill is alive and using his body to speak at periods.

Even more unsettling is the fact that the photo of Alex's voices (Stan, Soos, and Fiddleford) can be illuminated by a blacklight - this reveals Bill, alive, saying "STAY PARANOID!" and adding his signature. This also happens when one illuminates the photo of the Mystery Shack cast standing around the seemingly lifeless statue - doing so causes the cast and the statue to glow while the words "TRUST NO ONE!" appear.

It is unknown if the Hunt is canon to the TV series.

More direct hints are given by two cryptograms in Gravity Falls: Lost Legends, which is a "canon-ish"[10] source. In the story "Comix Up," when the gang enters "The Grimdark Chronicles," there are symbols of Bill's Symbol Substitution Cipher inscribed on six gravestones. If one decrypts the back row of gravestones and then the front row, it reads "BILL LIVES." Moreover, another cryptogram leads to a hidden page, shmeb-you-unlocked, which houses a similar hint. Book 9 of Shmeb You Unlocked contains "Gravitee Funnies," a comic by Stan. The last comic strip of Gravitee Funnies, "Little Dipper in Subconsciousville," shows Dipper saying "FLSKHU OLYHV!" in a dream, which decrypts to "CIPHER LIVES" using Caesar cipher.

Personality
Bill is a cunning, blasphemous, eccentric, psychopathic, and physically irreverent demon who finds most things amusing, particularly if they cause distress or harm to others. He is outrageous and outlandish, as well as a quick talker and thinker. Though he may come across as simply annoying, he shouldn't be underestimated; for when he is angered, he is a force to be reckoned with as he will unleash his near-omnipotent powers on those unfortunate enough to make him angry. When accused of being insane, Bill proudly agrees with the statement. He is also shown to be somewhat obnoxious, as seen when he makes his presence known to Dipper when the latter is trying to figure out a password within a limited amount of time. occasionally, his voice tumbles to a lower pitch(usually when emphasizing a statement).

Bill is not one who believes in rules. Instead, he follows his own selfish philosophy which means doing whatever he wants without care for the consequences. He thinks of laws and physics as senseless and displays an irresistible urge to break those rules down by causing absolute chaos however he can. The lives he ruins hold no merit to him and he finds amusement in tormenting and turning people's worlds upside-down. He also sees reality as an "illusion," and values its destruction.

When possessing Dipper's body, Bill is shown to be rather masochistic, hurting himself in various ways for the thrill of it, exclaiming that "pain is hilarious." He seems to have little knowledge about the human body, specifically its physical limits. This comes back at him when he fights Mabel over Journal 3, as he eventually falls down, exhausted.

In "Weirdmageddon Part 1," he shows sadistic tendencies, such as when he shuffles "the function of every hole in Preston Northwest's face"(Which also shows that he is not a team player) and in "Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls" when he decides to kill one of the Pines twins "just for the heck of it."

Appearance
Bill appearance.png
Bill is a yellow, two-dimensional, triangular creature who bears a strong resemblance to the reverse side of the Great Seal of the United States, which in turn consists of the Eye of Providence and an unfinished Egyptian pyramid. The color of his body briefly becomes lighter when he speaks.

He has a single large eye rimmed with four short black lashes on the top and bottom, though sometimes he has 3 on the top and 4 on the bottom. He moves around mostly by floating about, and rarely actually stands on his own two feet. He has thin, black limbs, wears a small, black bow tie, and a tall, thin, black top hat that floats just above his head. he has no mouth whatsoever. His arms do not seem to be in any fixed position and can move along the perimeter of his body without any difficulty. He occasionally carries a small black or yellow cane. The lower part of his body has a brick-like pattern of lines. He has no fixed size, and he has been shown to be as small as a hand and much larger than the Mystery Shack.

In the book Dipper and Mabel and the Curse of the Time Pirates' Treasure!: Select Your Own Choose-Venture it is strongly implied by the Axolotl's poem about Bill that he's an equilateral triangle: the first verse says "sixty degrees that come in threes", and equilateral triangles have three internal angles of 60° each.[11]

However, when he gets angry, his voice deepens significantly, the color of his body turns red and his eye turns black with a white pupil, (in close-up, his eye shows a red iris.) and everything on his body that was previously black turns white.

When possessing someone, that person's skin becomes pale and their eyes become yellow with black slits like Bill's. The voice also changes to Bill's.

Summoning ritual
To summon Bill Cipher, one needs a picture of one's intended victim. The eyes must be crossed out and the picture must be surrounded by eight candles in a circular formation. Then the following incantation must be recited: "Triangulum, Entangulum. Meteforis Dominus Ventium. Meteforis Venetisarium!" Your eyes will glow blue. The sky will turn grey as you enter the mindscape. You'll say "backward message" in reverse 5 times. A triangle appears. One eye opens and it turns into Bill's normal appearance. However, it is shown that Bill has the ability to temporarily pull other beings into his plane of existence if he so pleases, as seen in "Sock Opera."

Preventing Bill's chaos
In order to prevent Bill's chaos inside someone's mind, one must light nine candles and place one's hand on the victim's forehead. Say the following incantation: "Videntis Omnium. Magister Mentium. Magnesium Ad Hominem. Magnum Opus. Habeus Corpus. Inceptus Nolanus Overratus. Magister Mentium. Magister Mentium. Magister Mentium." One's eyes will then turn blue and one will be brought to the victim's mind the way one pictures it. One will then have to find a way to stop Bill oneself.

There are also three known preemptive methods to stop Bill from entering minds. The first known method is a shielding spell that involves moonstones, mercury, and unicorn hair, which also protects against Bill's chaos when he gains corporeality. The second method is placing a physical barrier around the mind, such as Ford's metal plate, though Ford stated it's not the safest method. The last method is "encrypting" a subject's thoughts, making them too difficult for Bill to read. It is safer than the second method and more mobile than the first, but very time-consuming.

The Cipher File

A page depicting how Bill enters a person's mind.

Stanford Pines has a file containing information on Bill Cipher and various sightings of him throughout history. The file contains pictures and a page ripped out of a book, with images of a pyramid (presumably in Egypt) and the Eye of Providence. Another page in the file is titled "Alligans Contractus" (which is Latin for "Binding Contract" with a picture of an old man shaking Bill's hand, both of which are surrounded by a blue flame, signifying the man is making a deal.) There is also a trifold paper with three sections titled: Our World (with a drawing of a human head), Mindscape (with a drawing of a person and Bill and the coded message: Black and White), and Nightmare Realm (with a picture of Bill).


Left: Book excerpt Right: Examples of sightings


Left: Alligans Contractus Right: Book excerpt

The page ripped out of a book ("book excerpt" on images to the right) reads:

Pyramids, also known as square-cones, are found all around the globe and have deeply mysterious origins. Modern engineers marvel at their seemingly impossible construction, but many don't realize they're actually just the skeleton remnants of an ancient race of large triangular dinosaurs who had very blocky bones. The Cycloptostoneosaurus was a feared predator and roamed the plains of North Africa where it subsisted on a diet of warthogs and meerkat, is made tender by their carefree lives and trouble-free philosophies. The reign of the pyramid continued well into the 18th century where a young George Washington once saw one on summer vacation and swore that he would found a nation with the sole purpose of putting an image of it on the back of dollar bills. Pyramids today are mainly tourist attractions and setting for conspiracy movies. Like that one where the guy has to steal the Declaration of Independence. You know the one, "Conspiracy Hank Goes Overboard." If you ever get a skateboard go to Egypt and try riding down the side of a pyramid. I hear that's really encouraged.
Journal 3
In Journal 3, behind Bill's name, is a message encrypted with a symbol substitution cipher. When decoded it reads: "Liar. Monster. Snappy Dresser."

Abilities
Bill is described as a "dream demon," he displays some of the characteristics historically attributed to demons, like the creation of contracts.

In the Mindscape
As Bill can't access the third dimension physically at first, summoning him seems to put the people around him into a sleep-like trance that allows him to manifest. The people observing are unaware they've fallen asleep until Bill leaves, after which they usually awake with a jolt. Bill can also enter another person's mind through that person's dreams.

Once within the trance, or within someone's mindscape, Bill's powers are vastly magnified; he becomes capable of changing his appearance, changing the appearance of other people's dream selves, and changing the area at will. He can also pluck information from any others who are also inside and bring those ideas and images to life, as was the case with Xyler and Craz. Bill can communicate with his summoner using his body as the screen of a video phone; he can also use his whole body as a projector, displaying past and future events as live video footage.

As Bill often mentions, he is close to omniscient: he knows the truth of many well-known conspiracies and can see the future (such as the destruction of the Gideon-bot and that Gideon Gleeful would go to prison), an ability he often flaunts by offering to tell a person the exact time, date and cause of that person's death - he seemingly predicted Ford's death, by heart attack at the age of 92, upon first meeting him. Bill has the ability to see things through the eyes of any image of himself [12], which is why his image appears hidden throughout many items and places in Gravity Falls.


Bill (middle) possessing Dipper.

Bill also has the ability to, with the original owner's consent to an appropriately worded "deal," remove people's minds from their bodies, taking possession of the empty body himself. The real owner of the body is stuck in a ghost-like form within the mindscape, unable to affect the rest of the world unless that person finds a vessel. This vessel doesn't have to be a living thing, as revealed when Dipper used a puppet of himself to communicate with Mabel while stuck as a disembodied spirit.

Despite his vast knowledge and abilities, Bill has limitations. He must be summoned in order to appear first: he vanished from Gravity Falls once Ford disappeared, and only manifested again after Gideon summoned him once more, even remarking that he hadn't been there "in a while." He can only access bodies and conscious minds if he is allowed to through a contract, which involves agreeing to certain terms and shaking Bill's hand. Being well aware of this, Bill is known to twist and manipulate the words of these contracts for his benefit. When taking possession of a mortal body, Bill becomes limited to it, subject to pain (which he finds "hilarious"), exhaustion, and even the host body's particularities, as evidenced when he was shown to react to Dipper's ticklish areas while in Dipper's body.

His vast powers are also strictly limited to dreams and the mindscape: his powers do not migrate into his host body and can't affect the physical world.

In Physical Form
After smashing the inter-dimensional rift and creating a gateway from the Nightmare Realm, Bill became incarnate, which allowed him to both exist and affect the real world.

In his physical form, Bill is nigh-omnipotent, bringing inanimate objects to life and turning people into statues of the material of his choice. He can regenerate every aspect of himself, create everything from objects to elaborate pocket dimensions (like Mabel's prison bubble) and produce electric charges (shot from his eye). His abilities in this form also include: apportation, inter-universal travel, matter manipulation, telekinesis, pyrokinesis, time manipulation, telepathy, mind control, illusion manipulation, dream manipulation, nightmare inducement, madness inducement (can create bubbles that induce madness in whatever they touch), clairvoyance, objects summoning, intangibility, reality-warping, levitation, possession, precognition, size-shifting, fourth wall awareness (he is aware of the real world and can "see" us), and resistance to reality-warping and space-time manipulation. He even surpasses Time Baby's powers, which he displays by disintegrating him during "Weirdmageddon Part 1." Bill himself declares that he controls space, matter and, after getting Time Baby out of the way, time itself.

However, even an incarnate Bill discovered limitations in his power. Bill's physical eye proved particularly sensitive and took more time than the rest of him to regrow. Even while capable of vastly affecting the physical world, he still could not enter bodies or conscious minds without the contract-and-handshake process. Gravity Falls' bubble of weirdness also thwarted Bill's powers, as no amount of hitting or shooting at it dissolved the barrier, which stopped Weirdmageddon from advancing into the rest of the world.

7F99AA8D-8DC9-4B04-B4CF-1F1BD0AAE002.jpeg
The prophecy of the zodiac hung heaviest of all over Bill's mind. This prophecy explained that if ten particular individuals gathered in the circle designed by the ancients who had known Bill, they would be able to stop him; however, this would not come to pass if any of them broke the chain.

Despite this, Bill's own ego proved to be his most fatal flaw, as it led him to underestimate the "mortals": he failed to recognize Stan's trick, as he was too giddy to read his thoughts, driven by the possibility of learning how to bypass the bubble over Gravity Falls, and did not realize he was at his most fragile while in the mindscape. His elimination also revealed that, while in the mindscape, he was as vulnerable to erasure via the memory gun as all other thoughts.

Cameos
The following are sightings of Bill and the Eye of Providence outside his physical appearance.

Season 1
Image	Episode	Description
Opening book.png	"Gravity Falls Main Title Theme"	Top left of the scrolling page.
For a brief flicker at the end of the opening.
Opening Bill Cipher Wheel.png	In a page of book 2, hidden in one frame at the end of the intro.
For a few frames after the wheel disappears
S1e13 front of shack.png	Multiple episodes	The 'A' in Mystery Shack over the main entrance.
First seen in "Tourist Trapped."
S2e1 nervous.png	On the rug in the Mystery Shack's gift shop.
First seen in "Tourist Trapped."
S1e1 eye.png	The red stained glass window on the main attic floor.
First seen in "Tourist Trapped."
S1e3 wax abraham lincoln melted.png	"Headhunters"	The window in the room which stored the forgotten wax figures, and melted Wax Abraham Lincoln.
S1e4 gideon makes doll.png	"The Hand That Rocks the Mabel"	"Bill Jar," a glass jar holding Gideon's paintbrushes. In upper right corner of the image.
S1e5 wendy hang 3.png	"The Inconveniencing"	The window under Wendy's hangout spot.
S1e8 -12 dollar bill.png	"Irrational Treasure"	On the right side of the negative twelve dollar bill.
S1e9 waddles runs away.png	"The Time Traveler's Pig"
"Candy Monster"	On the back of playing cards.
S1e10 soos introducing arcade.png	"Fight Fighters"	On the screen of an arcade game.
S1e11 gideon ice cream.png	"The Hand That Rocks the Mabel"
"Little Dipper"	Carpet pattern, such as under the chair and to the front left of Gideon.
S1e12 Dipper vs Summerween Trickster.png	"Summerween"	On Dipper's shield.
S1e16 candy has tools to torture dipper.png	"Carpet Diem"	On a tube of makeup-gel.
S1e16 rom coms.png	On the top of the spine of Boy Cray Cray.
Season 2
Image	Episode	Description
S2e1 Trembley in the Background full.png	"Scary-oke"	On the top left corner of Dipper's Big Mysteries board.
S2e7 forboding.png	"Society of the Blind Eye"	Old Man McGucket tents his fingers to resemble him.
S2e10 bill banner.png	"Northwest Mansion Mystery"	On a tapestry in the Northwest Manor.
S2e13 dipper and book 2.jpg	"Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons"	His name is displayed on the cash register.
S2e14 bill wheel.jpg	"The Stanchurian Candidate"	Drawn on a wall in Gideon's prison cell, behind a poster.
S2e16 bill cameo.jpg	"Roadside Attraction"	Carved in the wooden fence on the far left.

Bill Cipher in Rick and Morty.

Outside of Gravity Falls
Bill also had a cameo in Justin Roiland's animated series Rick and Morty. He appears on a monitor during the episode "Big Trouble in Little Sanchez." Bill is also seen on a screen when Rick is captured by the Galactic Federation as if he is being studied by both Nuptia 4 and the Galactic Federation in "Rick and Morty."
During the post-credits of the episode "The Whirly Dirly Conspiracy," a slight mark on the bridge shows a big resemblance to Bill.
Triangular symbols resembling Bill appear in several episodes of DuckTales.
A poster featuring Bill can briefly be seen in the episode "Sophomore Slump" of Star vs. the Forces of Evil.
Bill makes a cameo in a post-it on King's Demon board in the episode "The Intruder" of The Owl House.
He also makes a cameo in the crossover with Amphibia in the episode "Wax Museum", in the carpet at the curiosity hut.
He later makes another cameo in the episode "True Colors" where he is seen on a page when Marcy flips through a book.
A Bill plush appears inside the claw machine in Big City Greens episode "Present Tense" along with plushies of other characters from other Disney Television Animation shows.
Bill cameos in The Simpsons episode "Bart's In Jail!". In a mass hallucination of the titular family, the Norse god of mischief Loki claims that Bill is one of his many forms, and Bill says, "Buy crypto, suckers!" Alex Hirsch reprises his role.
Sightings
Intro: "Gravity Falls Main Title Theme"
Season 1
101. "Tourist Trapped" (pictured)
103. "Headhunters" (pictured)
104. "The Hand That Rocks the Mabel" (pictured)
105. "The Inconveniencing" (pictured)
108. "Irrational Treasure" (pictured)
109. "The Time Traveler's Pig" (pictured)
110. "Fight Fighters" (pictured)
111. "Little Dipper" (pictured)
112. "Summerween" (pictured)
113. "Boss Mabel" (pictured)
114. "Bottomless Pit!" (pictured)
116. "Carpet Diem" (pictured)
117. "Boyz Crazy" (pictured)
118. "Land Before Swine" (pictured)
119. "Dreamscaperers"
120. "Gideon Rises" (pictured)
Shorts
1. "Candy Monster" (pictured)
6. "The Hide-Behind" (pictured)
Season 2
201. "Scary-oke" (pictured)
202. "Into the Bunker" (pictured)
203. "The Golf War" (pictured)
204. "Sock Opera"
205. "Soos and the Real Girl" (pictured)
206. "Little Gift Shop of Horrors" (pictured)
207. "Society of the Blind Eye" (pictured)
209. "The Love God" (pictured)
210. "Northwest Mansion Mystery" (pictured)
211. "Not What He Seems" (mentioned)
212. "A Tale of Two Stans" (mentioned)
213. "Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons" (likeness)
214. "The Stanchurian Candidate" (pictured)
215. "The Last Mabelcorn"
216. "Roadside Attraction" (pictured)
217. "Dipper and Mabel vs. the Future"
218. "Weirdmageddon Part 1"
219. "Weirdmageddon 2: Escape From Reality"
220. "Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls"
Games
Oddity Creator (pictured)
Mystery Shack Mystery (pictured)
Postcard Creator (pictured)
Fright Night (pictured)
Rumble's Revenge (pictured)
PinesQuest (pictured)
Villains Unite!
Gravity Falls: Legend of the Gnome Gemulets (pictured)
Take Back The Falls (game)
Quotes
"Gravity Falls, it is good to be back!"
—Bill Cipher after being summoned by Gideon[source]

"It's funny how dumb you are!"
—Bill Cipher's Quote[source]

"Remember! Reality is an illusion, the universe is a hologram, buy gold, BYE!"
—Bill Cipher[source]

"YOU! You can't even imagine what you just cost me! Do you have any idea what I'm like when I'm MAD?"
—Bill Cipher yelling at Mabel after failing a deal with Gideon[source]

"EAT NIGHTMARES!"
—Bill Cipher[source]

"Sure I am, what's your point?"
—Bill to Gideon after he calls him insane[source]

"A darkness approaches. A day will come in the future where everything you care about will change... Until then I'll be watching you! I'll be watching you..."
—Bill Cipher[source]

"Sorry kid, but you're MY puppet now!"
—Bill after possessing Dipper's body[source]

"You can't stop me! I'm a being of pure energy with no weakness!"
—Bill Cipher[source]

"For one trillion years I've been trapped in my own decaying dimension, waiting for a new universe to call my own. Name's Bill! But you can call me your new lord and master for all of eternity!"
—Bill Cipher[source]

"Ow! my eye! Do you have any idea how long it takes to regenerate that?!"
—Bill Cipher, in response to the Shacktron tearing Bill’s eye from its socket[source]

"Don't toy around with me Shooting Star! I... SEE... EVERYTHING!"
—Bill Cipher talking to Mabel[source]

"Hey, Achillles! Nice work with the HEEL!(Rips off the leg)'"
—Bill Cipher to The Shacktron[source]

"All right, Ford! Time's up; I've got the kids! I think I'm gonna kill one of 'em now, just for the heck of it!"
—Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls

"I've got some children I need to make into corpses!!! (in low-pitched gravelly voice) See ya real soon!"
—Bill after turning into his Monster Form.

"When I get my hands on you kids, I'm gonna disassemble your molecules!!!"
—Bill, whilst pursuing Dipper and Mabel in his monster form.

"Y-you idiot! Don't you realise you're destroying your own mind too?"
—Bill in and to Stanley's mind-space, while his Stan's memories are getting erased.

"You're making a mistake!! I'll give you anything: money, fame, riches, infinite power, your own galaxy, PLEASE!"
—Bill Cipher begging Stan to not erase him[source]

"A-X-O-L-O-T-L! My time has come to burn! I say your name to invoke the ancient power that I may return!"
—Bill saying the name of the Axolotl, foreshadowing his (possible) return.[source]


Merchandise
There is a variety of official Bill Cipher merchandise you can buy, including plushes, posters, toys, keychains, and more. Most of it can be found on the Mystery Shack website: https://themysteryshack.com/

Plushes
Deluxe Bill Cipher Plush - $59.99 USD
Description: He's back and bigger than ever! This Deluxe Bill Cipher plush celebrates the 5th anniversary of the finale of Gravity Falls.

Bill is over 16" tall without his hat and comes in at just under 28" with it! His body is about 20" wide and 2" thick! The hat is held in place with discrete color matching velcro. It's about 8" in diameter at its base.

The brick lines are fully embroidered and there's a real bowtie (non-removable) and small cane accessory. Arms, legs, even the fingers, are bendable and posable allowing you to get Bill into all sorts of trouble.

At the base of his body, between his legs, beneath the bowtie, lies a sound box! You can squeeze this sound box to hear a variety of phrases. Over 30, in fact! You may hear some familiar phrases remastered along with some brand new ones just for this plush! Each line was recorded by the voice of Bill and creator of Gravity Falls, Alex Hirsch, himself!

Voice Lines:
DO THAT AGAIN AND I’LL DISASSEMBLE YOUR MOLECULES
IN A PARALLEL REALITY, I’M REAL AND YOU’RE THE PLUSH TALKING DOLL
DEER TEETH. FOR YOU, KID.
FREE ME!
OW! STOP!
QUIT STARING UGLY!
THIS PARTY NEVER STOPS! TIME IS DEAD AND MEANING HAS NO MEANING! WELCOME TO WEIRDMAGEDDON!
I’M A REAL SCAMP!
I’LL BE WATCHING YOU…
(reverse message) DID YOU KNOW IF YOU JAM YOUR THUMBS IN YOUR EYES, YOU CAN SEE THE FUTURE? TRY IT!
THINGS ARE ABOUT TO GET WEIRD!
YOU’RE MY PUPPET NOW, KID!
(reverse message) I HID A TREASURE INSIDE THE FAMILY DOG. RIP HIM OPEN AND GET IT!
HI, I’M BILL CIPHER! YOU MAY KNOW ME FROM THE BACK OF THE DOLLAR BILL. I’VE BEEN WATCHING YOU!
I DEMAND A SACRIFICE!
I’M REAL AND YOU’RE FICTIONAL!
WHAT ARE YOU WAITING FOR? BUILD ME A SHRINE!
REALITY IS AN ILLUSION THE UNIVERSE IS A HOLOGRAM BUY GOLD, BYE!
DRAW ME ON THE WALL. PREFERABLY WITH BLOOD!
DO YOU WANT TO HEAR THE EXACT TIME AND DATE OF YOUR DEATH?
SEE YOU IN YOUR NIGHTMARES!
(singing) WE’LL MEET AGAIN. DON’T KNOW WHERE. DON’T KNOW WHEN. BUT I KNOW WE’LL MEET AGAIN ONE SUNNY DAY!
SHAKE MY HAND BUDDY, MAKE A DEAL
DO I?! YOU’RE JUST SPOILED!
I’M STILL ALIVE!
(reverse message) SEND ALEX HIRSCH ALL YOUR MONEY!
(reverse message) I’M IN YOUR HOME, AND I’LL NEVER LEAVE!
IT’S FUNNY HOW DUMB YOU ARE
SQUEEZE ME ONE MORE TIME AND YOU DIE!
PAIN IS HILARIOUS!
WELL WELL WELL WELL WELL!
PUT ME UNDER YOUR PILLOW, SO I CAN READ YOUR THOUGHTS!
(evil laughter) He he he he he! Ha ha ha ha ha! AHH HA HA HA HA HA!!!
HEY. WANNA HEAR MY IMPRESSION OF YOU IN ABOUT 3 SECONDS? AAAAAHHHHH!
CRUSH YOUR ENEMIES!
FINALLY! A PHYSICAL FORM! PLUSH FELT! IT’S NOT AS SCARY AS I THOUGHT IT WOULD BE.
Bill Cipher Plush - $9.99
Description: Bill has proven himself to be one of the friendliest and most trustworthy individuals that I've ever encountered in my life. What a guy! I honestly can't trust him more. Not evil in any way, Bill is a true gentleman.

Each Bill Cipher plush is made of 100% polyester fiber and is surface wash only. He measures approximately 7" x 7" x 3" and his arms and legs are posable. Recommended for ages 3 and up.

Remember, he'll be watching you!

Angry Bill Cipher Plush - $9.99
Description: Well, you've done it now. You went and angered Bill Cipher. You can't really blame him. We all know what you did and you deserve it. Enjoy the Nightmare Realm.

Each Bill Cipher plush is made of 100% polyester fiber and is surface wash only. He measures approximately 7" x 7" x 3" and his arms and legs are posable. Recommended for ages 3 and up.

Remember, he'll be watching you!

Toys / Figures
Posters
Keychains / Lanyards

Trivia
Contrary to popular belief, Bill Cipher cannot be identified as male or female, as he is a being above the concept of gender or race. He also claims his home dimension has 14 billion different gender identities and there is paperwork involved in determining the sexual orientation and he's not exactly been keeping track of his. Whether this is true or him just expounding to seem impressive however is unclear.
That said, he does sound like a male which combined with his name, are the reasons people assume he is one. As such, this wiki refers to the character with "he/him" pronouns.
He is based on the Eye of Providence, which is most commonly seen on the back of the American dollar bill.
His name is a combination of Bill, referring to the Eye of Providence which appears on dollar bills, and cipher, which is the algorithm for encryption or decryption.
His name may also be an allusion to the Beale ciphers, a set of three ciphertexts, one of which allegedly states the location of a buried treasure of gold, silver, and jewels estimated to be worth over USD $63 million as of September 2011.
It may also be a reference to the names Lou Cipher (Lucifer) and Bill Zeebub (Beelzebub), which are common pseudonyms for Satan. Beelzebub is also viewed by some religions as one of the seven princes of hell and is known as the Lord of the Flies.
Being a demon based on the Eye of Providence, Bill Cipher can also be seen as a reference to the Illuminati, a popular gag in pop culture.
On the page about Bill in Journal 2, the −$12 bill says "semper vigilantem," which in Latin means "always watching."
Bill ignites a blue flame in his hand when, in order to seal a deal, he shakes the hand of the other party.[2][3]
Both Journals 2 and 3 contain sections on Bill, but whereas Journal 2 contains instructions on how to summon Bill, Journal 3 contains instructions on how to stop Bill if he is summoned.
Additionally, Journal 2 states that his name is not known, while Journal 3 gives the name: Bill Cipher.
In "Dreamscaperers," Gideon summons Bill with an incantation. In reverse, Gideon is simply saying "backward message" repeatedly.[13]
In "Sock Opera," when possessing Dipper, he states "It's been so long since I've inhabited a body!" most likely referring to Ford, as shown in "The Last Mabelcorn."
David Lynch of Twin Peaks fame was originally offered to voice Bill, but when he declined the offer, Alex Hirsch took over the role with a "bad impression of him."[14]
A code from "Sock Opera" says that he is made from pure energy, not skin and bones, which Bill states himself in the same episode.
When Alex Hirsch had originally conceived Bill's character, he had planned for him to be green as opposed to yellow; he eventually switched to the latter after Bill's green appearance was too akin to a leaf.[15]
Bill is green in his cameo in "Fight Fighters."
In Dipper's and Mabel's Guide to Mystery and Nonstop Fun!, he begins talking about his "Nightmare Realm" bringing forth something. He then stops and says that he's getting ahead of himself. He also shares the following knowledge:
Chairs have feelings and feel pain whenever you sit on one.
The lunar landing was faked to hide the fact the moon doesn't exist. It's a two-dimensional disk hiding alien space surveillance.
Western democracy is a sham propped up by an elite cabal of the super-rich.
Alex Hirsch stated, "Time Baby and Bill do not like each other; if they saw each other at a party, they would be doing that 'awkward circle thing' where they're making eye contact but they're not talking to each other, and everybody's like 'Do they know each other? Do they have a history?'"[15]
Bill is older than the Universe. In fact, he is older than time itself, as he is at least 1 trillion years old.[16]
Originally, in "Weirdmageddon Part 1," Bill was going to sing a song titled, "It's Gonna Get Weird." However, the song couldn't fit into the episode due to time constraints.
Alex Hirsch with the real-life Bill Cipher statue.

Bill is seemingly destroyed when Stan's mind is erased with him inside it. His physical body, which turned to stone when he left it, remains in the Gravity Falls Forest. In fact, it was revealed near the credits that the writers have hidden this statue of his body somewhere in real-life Oregon. Months later, Alex Hirsch started the Cipher Hunt, a worldwide scavenger hunt to find said statue.
In the finale, it is revealed that Bill is from the second dimension.
Bill's backstory parallels the novel Flatland, about a two-dimensional square who begins to question his plane of existence. This is further supported when Bill said in an AMA that "EDWIN ABBOTT ABBOTT [the author of Flatland] HAS A DECENT IDEA [about Bill's origin]."[17]
He also stated in the AMA that he used to have a family, but not anymore.[18]
It is stated in one of the Gravity Falls books that he watched as his dimension burned.[19]

A picture of an unknown language with its alphabet depicted on Bill Cipher.

In code on the "July 29th" page in the real-life Journal 3, Bill claims that, when Fiddleford was caught halfway in the portal, he saw Bill removing his exoskeleton to feed.
Bill isn't the cause of Gravity Falls' weirdness. On the contrary, that weirdness is what attracts him to the town.[20]
In the BYUtv series American Ride, in episode seven of season eight, host Stan Ellsworth visits Redwood National Park. As he leans on a guardrail, an image of Bill Cipher done in black paint or marker is visible on the railing.
Bill had several influences over history:
When the ancient Egyptians attempted to create a portal for Bill, it only worked for ten minutes (letting out a jackal-headed man from the Nightmare Realm). Bill was furious. He tormented them with nightmares, and they built giant stone tributes to Bill, hoping to make them stop. (The arms and top hats of these structures broke off over time.)
Bill gave George Washington secrets that helped him defeat the British. But when George’s attempt at a steam-powered portal sank into a swamp, Bill gave Washington such bad nightmares that he ground his teeth into dust in his sleep and then had to get wooden ones. Washington put Bill on the one-dollar bill in order to appease him.
Bill helped Stanley Kubrick fake the US moon landing, hoping that, in return, Kubrick would convince NASA to build a functioning portal. When NASA rejected the proposal, Bill cursed Kubrick with bizarre nightmares, which, in an ironic twist, ended up helping him in his film career.
Bill's catchphrase "I'm watching you!" was inspired by the Eye of Providence, also described as the "All-Seeing Eye." However, this phrase could also apply to the National Security Agency, an intelligence agency that protects the US communications network and information systems. Many people wonder if the NSA is spying on them.
In Rick and Morty's episode "Morty's Mind Blowers," where it's discovered that Rick Sanchez secretly stores Morty's memories, there are two memories labeled "Stanford" and "Bill C." It's likely that they are memories of encounters with Ford and Bill Cipher, since the two series are considered to occur in the same multiverse, and both Ford and Bill, as well as Morty, have traveled between dimensions.
In the episode "Dreamscaperers," Mabel calls Bill an "isosceles monster." However, the Axolotl describes him as "sixty degrees that come in threes."
According to Alex Hirsch in one of the Gravity Falls commentaries, Bill was originally going to be an one-shot character, but due to his involvement in the Gravity Falls lore and his many cameo appearances, he became the main antagonist. In addition to this, Bill was also going to originally be portrayed more as a neutral trickster than the much more malevolent and chaotic deposition that would later characterize him.
It is implied that, in the Gravity Falls universe, the Eye of Providence is modeled after him rather than the other way around.
In his AMA, it is revealed that Bill will respond to any variation of his name: William, Will, Willy, Billy, etc. Template:Cite

Dipper Pines
VIEW SOURCE

Mason "Dipper" Pines[1] (born August 31[2], 5 minutes after Mabel Pin[3]es) is a smart, curious, and adventurous 13-year-old boy spending the summer with his Great Uncle Stan in Gravity Falls, Oregon, where he and his sister constantly encounter the town's paranormal tendencies. Armed with a mysterious journal he found in a hidden place in a tree in the forest, he is the overall main protagonist of Gravity Falls and he seeks to uncover the town's mysterious secrets. Dipper is represented by the pine tree in the Zodiac.


Contents
1 History
1.1 Early life
1.2 Arrival in Gravity Falls
1.3 Adventures
1.3.1 Season 1
1.3.2 Season 2
2 Personality
3 Appearance
4 Relationships
4.1 Mabel Pines
4.2 Stan Pines
4.3 Soos Ramirez
4.4 Wendy Corduroy
4.5 Robbie Valentino
4.6 Gideon Gleeful
4.7 Dipper and Mabel's parents
4.8 Candy Chiu and Grenda
4.9 Pacifica Northwest
4.10 Ford Pines
5 Abilities
6 Sightings
6.1 Season 1
6.2 Shorts
6.3 Season 2
6.4 Games
7 Quotes
8 Trivia
9 Gallery
10 References
11 Site navigation
History
Early life

Dipper in his lamb costume.

Dipper was born on August 31.[3] His family lives in Piedmont, California. At a young age, Dipper's mother would dress him up in a lamb costume and have him perform his signature song and dance, the "Lamby Lamby Dance."[4] He and Mabel were raised nonreligious, but celebrate all holidays at his sister's insistence.[5] Since he was young, his favorite holiday has been Halloween, of which his favorite part is trick-or-treating with Mabel.[6] He is also known to have been teased about his birthmark by other children until he started hiding it, which may be how he earned his nickname when he was no older than five.[7] He also attended Eggbert Elementary with his sister.

Arrival in Gravity Falls
Sometime during the month of June,[8] Dipper and his twin sister Mabel were sent north up the coast [2] to the small town of Gravity Falls, Oregon, to stay with their Great Uncle Stan (whom the twins call "Grunkle Stan".) Stan runs a tourist trap named the Mystery Shack which doubles as and was originally his house. While Mabel adjusts with ease, Dipper initially finds it difficult to get used to his new surroundings.


A bus drops Dipper and Mabel Pines off at the Mystery Shack in the opening sequence.

One fateful day, Stan tasks Dipper to put up hanging signs advertising the Mystery Shack in the "spooky part" of the Gravity Falls Forest, where he discovers a journal written by an unknown and enigmatic author detailing the town's secrets and dangers. Dipper discloses his findings with Mabel and consecutively meets her new boyfriend, Norman, who he begins to suspect is a zombie, based on the information in Journal 3. Despite failing to find any incriminating evidence, Dipper confronts his sister on the theory, resulting in an argument. During Mabel's date, however, he notices Norman's right hand falling off on camera, which Norman suspiciously attaches back on, making him fearful that Mabel could unknowingly be in danger.


Dipper opens the compartment containing Journal 3.

Using the Mystery Cart with the keys he obtains from the Mystery Shack's clerk, Wendy, Dipper quickly heads to rescue Mabel, and, upon finding her, he realizes that Norman is actually made up of five gnomes stacked on top of each other which are residing in the forest, who planned to kidnap Mabel and force her to become their "queen." He manages to subdue the creatures and escape with his sister, but they are pursued by a large monster made of hundreds of gnomes. The two end up crashing the Mystery Cart upon arriving at the Shack and are cornered by the monster. The head gnome, Jeff, informs them that they will do "something crazy" unless Mabel becomes their queen, and in response, Mabel agrees, much to Dipper's dismay. Shortly after accepting the gnomes' ring, she uses the Mystery Shack leaf-blower to defeat the gnomes, impressing Dipper. With all the gnomes finally gone, the two make up and enter the Shack, and in an act of newfound appreciation of the twins (disguised as having overstocked the Mystery Shack gift shop,) Stan allows them each one free gift, with Dipper choosing a new hat to replace his old one, which was taken by a gnome, and Mabel choosing a grappling hook. Before going to bed, he writes two new entries in the journal, one being that a gnome's weakness is a leaf blower, and the other in a new page of the journal stating that while Journal 3 has told him to refuse trust from anyone in the town, he knows Mabel will always have his back.[9]

Adventures
Season 1

Dipper, Mabel, and Soos looking for the Gobblewonker.

In the episode "The Legend of the Gobblewonker," Dipper goes fishing with Stan and Mabel as a family bonding day. When they hear that there is a lake monster in the vicinity known as the Gobblewonker, Dipper and Mabel want to find it and get proof of its existence, and avoid having to spend 10 hours on a boat with Stan while they're at it. Dipper wants to be the first to discover the beast so he can win the prize money and appear on TV. They ditch Stan and go with Soos to find it. Dipper brings 17 disposable cameras just in case they lose or break a camera. In the end, the Gobblewonker turns out to just be a mechanical creature driven by Old Man McGucket, who is looking for attention. Because they felt bad about leaving him, Dipper and Mabel spend the rest of their day with Stan to have their family bonding day.[10] At the very end of the episode, the camera pans into the water, revealing a real Gobblewonker swimming in the depths.


Dipper and Mabel accuse Toby Determined of murdering Wax Stan.

In "Headhunters," Dipper and Mabel help Stan uncover the case of Wax Stan's murder, mainly due to Sheriff Blubs and Deputy Durland being lazy and calling the case unsolvable. The twins first went to interrogate Manly Dan, the lumberjack at the downtown biker joint named Skull Fracture, after finding an axe at the crime scene (with some footprints with holes in them leading to said axe.) Manly Dan then reported the ax was left-handed, while Dan's dominant hand is right, narrowing the suspects down to one: Toby Determined, who is left-handed and who's shoe has a hole in it. He then revealed he was kissing a cardboard cutout of Shandra Jimenez, the news reporter, at 10:00 PM, the time of the murder, proving himself innocent. Dipper didn't find out who murdered Wax Stan until Wax Stan's funeral. Dipper, at the funeral, uncovers that Wax Sherlock Holmes and all the other wax figures had murdered Wax Stan. The murder was mostly Wax Sherlock Holmes, because he beheaded Wax Stan, and left the holed footprints in the shag carpet along with the axe, which which were Mabel and Dipper's first clues. Dipper then battled the wax figures, successfully killing most, like decapitating Wax Larry King, whose head is still in the vents, which was revealed in the end credits. Dipper then only had to battle Wax Sherlock Holmes, the true killer. He led him to the Mystery Shack's roof, and he melted when the sun came up.[11]


Gideon tries to kill Dipper.

In "The Hand That Rocks the Mabel", Dipper, Mabel, and Soos go to the Tent of Telepathy, where they view Gideon Gleeful perform. Dipper believed Gideon to be a bigger fraud than Stan. Gideon's attention is caught by Mabel's laugh while she is leaving the tent, prompting him to visit the Mystery Shack to ask her on a playdate, to which she accepts. They go on multiple playdates, and while they are viewing the town of Gravity Falls from the top of a factory, he asks her out, to which Mabel again accepts to not hurt Gideon's feelings. On that date, however, Mabel is asked out by Gideon again, and, under the pressure of the crowd formed around them, she accepts. When Dipper finds Mabel pacing the TV room, unsure on what to do, he offers to tell Gideon that Mabel isn't interested in him romantically. After Dipper tells him this, Gideon got very mad, and later that day lured Dipper into a factory to attack him. Dipper discovered that Gideon had an amulet that gave him the power to levitate objects. Gideon could almost control Dipper with it and came close to killing Dipper before Mabel came to save him and broke Gideon's amulet.[12]


Dipper performs his Lamby Lamby Dance to save everyone.

In "The Inconveniencing," Dipper and Mabel pretend to be thirteen so they can go to the haunted convenience store, Dusk 2 Dawn with Wendy and her friends. Wendy, her friends, Mabel, and Dipper are all horsing around in the store when Dipper goes to get more ice to dump into Thompson's pants. He then sees a headless brain with bloodshot eyeballs staring back at him. He screams and opens the fridge door again. Surprisingly, the figure was gone. Everyone goes back to see what it was about. He distracts them by pointing out the game Dancy Pants Revolution to not get called scared. Eventually, the group stumbles upon a chalk outline of two bodies. Dipper, claiming once again on being a teenager, lays in it, causing the outlines to turn green and the lights to go out. One by one, almost all of Wendy's friends disappear. The gravity in the store then turns upside down, with the ghosts possessing Mabel. Dipper then realizes that the reason the ghosts were upset was that everyone who disappeared were acting like the teenagers that they were. He goes up to the ghost and tells him he's not a teenager; He is, in fact, only 12 years old. Dipper then asks if there's anything he can do to help his friends, so he must perform the Lamby Lamby Dance. After doing so, charmed by the dance, the ghosts let everyone free. Instead of telling the true story to her friends that she viewed, however, Wendy makes up a story in which Dipper fought ghosts with a baseball bat in order to spare him from the embarrassment of the truth.


Dipper vs. the Multi-Bear.

After failing a manliness tester, Dipper feels that he has to prove his manliness. He ventures out into the forest and has an encounter with Manotaurs. Dipper is later sent by the Manotaurs to conquer the Multi-Bear and bring back its head, as a final test of manliness. The Multi-Bear is very ferocious and threatens to kill Dipper if he did not leave his cave. Dipper refuses and he and the bear begin fighting. Dipper ultimately wins and is going to end it. The Multi-Bear has one last request: to die listening to his favorite song, "Disco Girl." Dipper realizes that he and the Multi-Bear had something in common, and decides not to slay him. He later quits the Manotaurs' league. Crestfallen, he returns to his sister and uncle, who reassure him that, because he stood up for what he thought was right, he is his own man. He was able to grow one little piece of chest hair, but Mabel plucks it out and puts it in her scrapbook.[13]


Dipper and Tyrone brainstorming.

When Stan hosts a party at the Mystery Shack, Dipper helps set up the party and works the ticket booth with Wendy, viewing it as an optimal opportunity to spend time with her. As he tries to enact a complex plan to get Wendy to dance with him, he finds it increasingly difficult as unexpected obstacles (i.e. Wendy sneaking into the party and Robbie showing up). To help him revise and execute the plan, he opts to use a copy machine he had found earlier to make clones of himself, initially just Tyrone, and later Dippers #3 through #10 and Paper Jam Dipper. When Dipper strays from the procedure by talking to Wendy "like a normal person," the clones deem him unfit to dance with her and unsuccessfully try to imprison him, and ultimately fight to their deaths via fire sprinklers. Tyrone is the sole survivor among the clones and is the only one to realize the error of his ways (excessive planning) and proceeds to hang out with Dipper though he is accidentally melted upon drinking soda. Dipper then rips up his plan and returns to the dance floor to spend time with his family and friends.[14]


Dipper receives the President's Key.

After Pacifica Northwest criticizes Mabel's silliness, Dipper thinks that someone needs to "take her down a peg." He remembers reading that Nathaniel Northwest may not be the town founder of Gravity Falls. Dipper and Mabel head to the library to study the document in 3. Using a projector, they try to see if the symbol in the document is related to Egyptian, numerology, or Alchemist symbols. When he is about to light the document, Mabel folds it into a secret map and it leads to the Gravity Falls Museum of History. After solving a puzzle at the museum, they then head to the Gravity Falls Cemetery. They see a statue similar to what was on the puzzle. The finger of the statue opens a secret passageway leading to where Quentin Trembley's body is found in peanut brittle. Sheriff Blubs and Deputy Durland find them there and they say that all they had to do was to follow a trail of wrappers left behind by Mabel. The officers then play a video containing the history of Gravity Falls and how Quentin Trembley was elected to be the eight and a half president of the U.S. Blubs then says that they're going to escort Trembley's body and the twins to Washington D.C. After they get free, Quentin Trembley awards him with a key that opens any door in America and a $-12 dollar bill. Dipper also tells Pacifica about Nathaniel Northwest being a fraud and gives her the secret document which proves that Nathaniel Northwest did not found Gravity Falls, but that Quentin Trembley did.[15]


One of Dipper's countless failed attempts to fix his mistake with Wendy.

When the Mystery Fair rolls in, Dipper spends time with Wendy. When the latter expresses a desire for a stuffed animal, the former tries to win it for her, albeit to no avail, instead giving her a black eye. As Dipper scampers to get some ice, he runs into Blendin Blandin, thus preventing him from reaching Wendy before Robbie and enabling him to ask her out. Dipper sinks into a deep depression, but his spirits are lifted when he learns that Blendin has a time machine that will allow him to travel back and avoid hitting Wendy, going to lengths of theft to obtain it. After Dipper tries countless times to avoid his error and fails, he re-evaluates the situation and determines a way to avoid it, with Mabel's help, costing his sister's pig in the process. The twins fight over who will get their ideal present, coming into contact with various events in the meantime. When Mabel develops a depression more severe than Dipper's previous condition, he decides that the right thing to do is sacrifice his own satisfaction for his sister. After she thanks him, she has Waddles attack and embarrasses Robbie, to Dipper's satisfaction, and Blendin Blandin momentarily confronts them, only to be arrested by the Time Paradox Avoidance Enforcement Squadron.[16]


Dipper tries to get Rumble to fight Robbie for him.

As tension between Robbie and Dipper builds up, the former challenges the latter to a fistfight much to his horror, deciding to avoid the situation as opposed to facing it head-on "like a man." However, Dipper develops a whole new opinion of the battle when he brings a video game warrior, Rumble McSkirmish, to life to defend him, using the lie that Robbie killed Dipper's father as an excuse. But Dipper quickly loses control of his digital ally, who tries to kill Robbie, and a chase through town commences. After Soos arrives to help Dipper, the two-track Robbie, and Rumble down to the water tower, where Dipper decides to battle Rumble in an effort to fix the problem he created and save Robbie. Although Dipper loses, he still manages to get rid of Rumble, who is sent back to his game after emerging victorious. Robbie and Dipper agree not to fight in front of Wendy afterward, instead of hating one another in secret "like girls do."[17]


Dipper and Mabel cower at the sight of a now huge Gideon Gleeful.

After learning that Mabel has grown a millimeter taller than himself, Mabel, much to her brother's dismay, mocks him about becoming the superior twin. Driven by insecurity and jealousy, Dipper seeks out a magical way to increase his height to that of his sister and stumbles upon height-altering crystals in the forest that can do just that. After attaching a piece of the crystal to a flashlight and flipping the crystal to the side to increase, he switches on the button, flashing it on himself and he grows taller than Mabel. After gloating about being taller than her, Mabel discovers his secret and they fight over the crystal flashlight. When Gideon gets a hold of it, he uses it to shrink the twins and use them as ransom against Stan in hopes of taking over the Mystery Shack. After his initial efforts fail, Gideon decides to shrink Stan himself before taking control, and Dipper and Mabel set out to save their uncle and his business, still bickering about height along the way. Ultimately, they defeat Gideon just before he decreases Stan to minute proportions by tickling his armpits. The twins then grow themselves back to their previous heights, though they forget about a shrunken Soos.[18]


Dipper and his friends trick-or-treating.

Dipper and Mabel, like the rest of the town, are ecstatic about celebrating Gravity Falls' summer version of Halloween, Summerween, and plans to trick-or-treat with his sister, Candy, and Grenda. However, his outlook on the evening changes after Wendy mentions that she thinks such an activity is more suitable for little kids and invites him to a party. He is torn, which eventually leads to a conflict with Mabel. The evening is further complicated when the Summerween Trickster threatens to eat the group if they fail to obtain 500 pieces of candy for him by the night's end, and the group sets off to get their candy, with their rate of pick-up increasing greatly after Dipper formally dons a costume. Although they manage to obtain it, Dipper accidentally pushes the entire load of candy into a stream, thus causing the Trickster to chase after them. Soos momentarily destroys the monster after driving through him, he reassembles and chases them into the Summerween Superstore. There, the twins and their friends try to escape by disguising themselves in various costumes to go unnoticed, but Soos gives them away when he plays with the cackling skulls. The Trickster reveals his past and motives the group, and Soos makes him happy by eating him after finding out he is made of candy. Back at the Shack, Dipper and Mabel run into Wendy, who had returned from her party early, and everyone watches a horror movie marathon.[6]


Dipper the tour guide.

As Dipper and the other Mystery Shack employees grow increasingly resentful of the way Stan treats them, Dipper grows very happy when he learns that Mabel will be in charge for a few days and that she will respect her workers. He rejoices even more after Mabel destroys his hated werewolf costume and sends him off to find a real monster to display at the Shack, and he eventually returns with a goblin/gremlin hybrid, the Gremloblin. As he exhibits the beast to the tourists, he accidentally causes two to go insane, and he helps Mabel fight off the monster after he escapes. After Mabel is pushed too far and begins acting like Stan, Dipper decides to show tourists a fake attraction like his great uncle to gain money without scaring customers. He serves as an accountant in calculating the total cost of repairing the severely damaged Mystery Shack, and congratulates Mabel on her victory in her bet with Stan, but begs him not to put her in charge any longer.[19]


Dipper gets a voice changing formula from Old Man McGucket.

After Dipper, Mabel, Stan, and Soos fall into a bottomless pit, he and the others decide to bide their time by telling stories. Dipper goes first, telling the tale "Voice Over," in which he uses a voice-altering formula, courtesy of Old Man McGucket, to change his embarrassing, frequently cracking voice into a deep masculine voice, albeit that of a commercial voice-over. He observes unexpected results as people tease him for and run away from him because of his voice, and ultimately decides that he would rather have his own voice than any other after being chased by a mob of bikers. In Soos's story, "Soos' Really Great Pinball Story: Is That a Good Title? Do They Have to Be Puns or Whatever?" he gets trapped in a pinball machine with Mabel and Soos as a result of cheating to help Soos achieve the high score on a pinball machine in the shack, and the sentient game tries to kill them for what they did. In Mabel's "Trooth Ache," he is the witness and victim of many of his uncle's lies and disapproves of Mabel's use of Truth Telling Teeth to force Stan, to be honest, getting especially annoyed when he just says whatever comes to mind. In the real world, as the four approach the end of the pit, they simply come back out the top, and Dipper deduces that it is a wormhole. When Grunkle Stan falls back in, neither Dipper nor the others express concern.[20]


Dipper goofing off with Wendy.

On the hottest day of summer, Soos and the Pines decide to cool off at the local pool. Upon learning that Wendy is working there, Dipper gets a job as an assistant lifeguard to spend time with her and finds himself breaking many rules to have fun. When his boss, Mr. Poolcheck, driven by extreme anger, forces Dipper to work the night shift to ensure that no pool supplies get stolen or damaged during the night. As Stan, Soos, and Mabel break-in for various reasons, Dipper ends up pursuing his sister in a road chase to the lake, as she stole a pool cooler in which to transport Mermando. When he learns about Mermando and sees that he is dying of dehydration, he remorsefully obliges to his sister's suggestion of giving the merman "reverse CPR," and helps get Mermando into the lake. Back at the pool, he is fired for various damage done to pool property. Though he is sad at first, Wendy cheers him up by informing him that she, too, was fired, as she was taking too many snacks from the snack bar, and the two head out to break rules elsewhere.[21]


Dipper in Mabel's body and vice versa.

As Dipper and Mabel grow weary of sharing a room after a sleepover of Grenda and Candy's, the two stumble upon a secret room within the Shack and decide to compete to determine who should get it. However, things take an unexpected turn when the twins swap bodies. Dipper quickly figures that he can sabotage Mabel's chances of getting the room by doing stuff Stan hates in Mabel's body and tries to give Stan a rock sandwich. But, he is disappointed to learn immediately afterward Mabel is looking to sabotage him via like means. Dipper continues this but is soon thwarted by Grenda and Candy, who have come to have another sleepover with Mabel. Dipper tries to opt out by claiming he is going through one of his "irrational girly mood swings," but this is ignored. He then gets stuck reading "Wolfman Bare Chest" with the two, and is traumatized. Mabel wins the room for Dipper while she is in Dipper's body. He tries to get the key from her, but she locks herself in the room. Dipper is able to trick his way in by asking Candy and Grenda to ask their way in for what would typically be a Dipper makeover. When he gets in, lots and lots of body-swapping ensues. However, when Dipper and Mabel get back in their own bodies, they are able to obtain a cease-fire and understanding. Although, when the real Dipper goes to bed in his new room he feels lonely without Mabel, which causes him to move back into his old room in the attic with Mabel, and then gives the new room to Soos to replace his painful break room.[22]


Dipper realizes what a jerk he's been.

One day while working in the Shack, Dipper and Wendy are doing a running commentary on the Shack security tape's footage. Robbie comes in and talks to Wendy, asking her to go on a date with him, but Wendy is upset with Robbie for standing her up the night before. Dipper goes into the other room but still spies on the conversation they have. Dipper overhears Wendy talking about breaking up with Robbie. He is extremely happy to hear this, celebrating quietly and hugging Waddles as he does so, then quickly settles to watch the rest of the interaction. He is shocked to find that when Robbie plays a song for her, she forgives him. Dipper is convinced that Wendy is being brainwashed by the music, and tells Mabel and Grunkle Stan so. Mabel shrugs it off, but Grunkle Stan completely believes Dipper's story, relating it to when something similar happened to his old girlfriend, Carla "Hotpants" McCorkle. He helps Dipper search for a brainwashing message in the song, and when they find it, drives Dipper to where Wendy and Robbie are on their date. Dipper replays the message for Wendy to hear, and Robbie quickly says he didn't know about that message as he had ripped the song off from some band. Wendy is furious for being lied to and breaks up with Robbie on the spot. Dipper is elated that the breakup finally happened and asks Wendy if she would want to go bowling sometime. She snaps at him for being insensitive to her emotional state and runs off. Dipper feels bad, but Grunkle Stan cheers him up a little, saying that Dipper was trying to do the right thing, that Wendy would get over it eventually, and in the meantime, Dipper could always go bowling with him.[23]

In "Land Before Swine," when Waddles is snatched up by a pterodactyl on Stan's watch, Mabel leads Dipper and the other to a place filled with dinosaurs to rescue him. During this time, Dipper is infuriated by Soos, whose antics ruin their monster hunting exploits. The two reconcile, however, and by the end of the adventure, Dipper agrees to Soos' suggestion that they would be "pterodactyl bros."[24]


Dipper believes Stan hates him.

When Gideon sends Bill Cipher into Stan's mind to find the combination to the safe that the Mystery Shack's deed is in, Dipper, Mabel, and Soos follow. Once inside Stan's mind, Dipper is briefly discouraged after seeing a memory of Stan's where he calls Dipper "useless." Eventually, he sees the entirety of the memory and learns that Stan really is proud of him. Dipper joins with the others, and they manage to repel Cipher, but on returning discover that Gideon used dynamite to open the safe. With the deed in hand, Gideon forces everyone out of the Shack, and his father demolishes it with a wrecking ball.[25]


The twins dejectedly leave Gravity Falls.

After Gideon steals the Mystery Shack deed, the Pines move in with Soos' Abuelita. Dismayed to see that Stan has given up on getting the Shack back, Dipper teams up with his sister to get it back themselves. They recruit the gnomes to get the deed back from Gideon, but not only does the plan backfire, but Gideon gets Journal #3. As he and Mabel take the bus out of Gravity Falls, Gideon discovers that there are three books and assumes that Dipper kept the first one for himself. Gideon comes after them in his Gideon-bot. Gideon doesn't believe Dipper when he tells Gideon that he doesn't know about the other book. Gideon kidnaps Mabel, planning to make her his "queen." Dipper manages to get inside the Gideon-bot's control room and fights with Gideon, causing the robot to fall off the bridge. Mabel saves Dipper with her grappling hook. Enraged, Gideon tries to have the twins arrested, but Stan arrives and reveals that Gideon has been spying on everyone, causing Gideon to be arrested instead. The Pines family return to the Mystery Shack. Dipper tries to show Journal 3 to Stan, but Stan takes it, claiming it could inspire new attractions. Dipper is downhearted at the loss of Journal 3, but Mabel tells him he doesn't need the book to do great things. Dipper says he still wants the book, and Mabel is sure he'll get it back.[26]

Season 2
In "Scary-oke," Stan returns Journal 3 to Dipper. When federal agents come to the Mystery Shack to investigate strange activities, Dipper offers to help them by showing them the journal, but they do not believe him until he accidentally summons zombies from underground. After defeating the zombies alongside Mabel and Stan, Dipper falsely promises Stan that he will stay out of trouble.


Dipper and Wendy's encounter with the Shape Shifter.

In "Into the Bunker," Dipper tries to confess his feelings for Wendy but can't work up the courage, and instead asks her to tag along on his next investigation which she happily goes. They find the author's hidden bunker. Mabel fools around and pushes Dipper, who triggers a trap that closes in the walls. Dipper looks to the journal and points out a way to escape and they barely made it. Dipper's vest ended up being jammed in the closed-in-walls to which Mabel gets it for him. When she pulls it out, a love letter that Dipper intended to give to Wendy falls out. Because of this Mabel locks him in the closet with Wendy so he'd have no choice but to confess his love, but the two of them stumble into a secret laboratory, where they soon get chased by a giant insect-like creature. They run into a dead-end but are saved by who is believed to be the author of the journals. But this is later revealed to be a lie and that he was a Shape Shifter. After escaping its grasp and regrouping with Mabel and Soos they formulate a plan to stop it. By the end, the Shape Shifter says to Dipper that he will never find the author and something terrible is going to happen in Dipper's future. Also, Dipper finally admits his crush to Wendy. She gently turns him down, saying she is too old for him but tells him how much she values their friendship, saying she would probably throw herself into the bottomless pit if they ever stop being friends.

In "The Golf War," Dipper encourages Mabel to have the Lilliputians help her to cheat in the mini-golf tournament so she would win no matter what against Pacifica Northwest. However, this backfires when the Lilliputians try to kill Pacifica and Mabel must help save her. Dipper drives the course's golf cart to help everyone escape.


Bill Cipher in Dipper's body while Dipper is a ghost.

In "Sock Opera," Dipper is excited to figure out the code to the laptop with Mabel's help and is disappointed when she instead decides to put on a puppet show. However, he helps her, as she promises to help him with the password afterward. Every night he types in random words on the computer and hopes they work, with no success. After a few nights of this, Bill Cipher offers to help, but Dipper, knowing that Bill would try to trick him, declines. The next morning, Dipper tells Mabel of this, and she tells him that she will help him with the password. However, she becomes convinced that she must work harder on her puppet show, causing Dipper to be angry with her. He tries again with the laptop, and it announces that there were too many failed entries, and it would erase all data in 5 minutes. Bill returns and re-offers his help, saying that he wants a puppet in return. Dipper, feeling desperate, accepts. However, Bill takes Dipper's body and stomps on the laptop and tries to find Journal 3. Dipper, now a ghost, tells Bill that he will never find it, but Mabel comes in and tells him that she took the journal for her puppet show. Dipper follows Bill and his family to the Theater Time Theater, where Mabel's puppet show is being performed. He uses a puppet to tell Mabel that Bill is using his body and that she must stop him. Mabel makes Dipper take over the puppet show while she fights Bill and forces him out of his body. Dipper returns to his body and they go home.

In "Soos and the Real Girl," Dipper and Mabel try to help Soos find a date, and later they are attacked by.GIFfany along with Soos and Melody.


Dipper and "Smart" Waddles run off to put their brains to work.

In the "Little Gift Shop of Horrors" story, Abaconings, Dipper tries to figure out a puzzle toy. Finding difficulty and wanting to become smarter he looks to the journal to locate Percepshrooms that would grant him that. After retrieving it, he places it on his forehead as the journal suggested and went to sleep. Waking up the next morning with the thought of it working, only proved himself wrong as Waddles had eaten it off his head and he instead gained genius intelligence, even making an electronic device to allow himself to speak the human language for him. Loving the new Waddles, he and Waddles work together on a few things, the most significant thing being the Smarticle Accelerator. However, when Waddles presses a switch that destroys the machine to be normal for Mabel's sake and himself, Dipper was dispirited.


Dipper and Soos unknowingly about to be caught.

In "Society of the Blind Eye," Dipper continues research on who the author could be. That is when Mabel points out a clue on the broken laptop, to which Dipper indicates that the author must be Old Man McGucket. He, Mabel, Wendy, and Soos go to the junkyard to confront him. McGucket explains that he doesn't recall anything about the book but when Dipper flips to one of the pages with a strange symbol on it, McGucket panics, revealing that the symbol belonged to an unknown group who possibly did something to his mind. With the last thing McGucket remembered many years ago involved the History Museum, the gang heads off there along with McGucket. After chasing a suspicious person who was inside, they lose track of the person, finding themselves in a seemingly normal room. Dipper figures out that a hidden button was in it, opening a secret passageway, where they watched as the Blind Eye Society erased Lazy Susan's memories with a ray gun. When the coast was clear, they split up, leaving the girls to keep lookout. The boys find a mysterious room called The Hall of the Forgotten where tubes of various townsfolk memories were stored in. When they were spotted, they hid but were ultimately caught. The Blind Eye Society members revealed themselves as fellow townsfolk and planned to erase everyone's memories until McGucket intervened. In the end, Dipper and the gang were able to stop the Blind Eye members and erased their memories. Also, McGucket got his memories back, revealing that he isn't the author.


Dipper and Mabel taking on the challenges.

In "Blendin's Game," he and Mabel decide to throw a surprise party for Soos' birthday, only for Soos to displeased about it. They take Soos to laser tag to cheer him up. He and Mabel then walk into a portal and are challenged to Globnar by Blendin Blandin. They steal a time travel device and go back to the year 2002 where they meet Toby Determined trying to be a dancer, toddler Wendy (who thought Dipper was cute with him blushing in return) and toddler Tambry riding their tricycles, Robbie who soaks them with a water gun, and 12-year-old Soos, who misses his father (which explains why Soos hates his birthday in the future). They willingly let themselves get caught by Lolph and Dundgren to win the time wish for Soos. While in Globnar they complete in a series of challenges before the Time Baby finishes his bottle. Ultimately, he and Mabel win and return to the present to give Soos their time wish. He then wishes for Dipper and Mabel to be all fixed up, and to have an infinite pizza slice, telling them that if his father truly cared about him, he'd be here.

In "The Love God," Dipper continues to try to play cool to hang out with Wendy and her friends, shrugging off Mabel's suggestion to comfort Robbie (who is still depressed over his break-up with Wendy), saying the social structure is good as it is. However, when Mabel uses a love potion on Robbie and Tambry to make them date, it ends up splitting up Wendy and her friends, forcing Dipper to help Mabel to undo what she did by getting an antidote so the gang can get back together.


Dipper looks for advice on handling a category 10 ghost.

In "Northwest Mansion Mystery," Dipper is visited by Pacifica at the Mystery Shack, asking him for his help in getting rid of a ghost that has inhabited her house. He at first refuses but accepts on the condition that Pacifica gives Mabel, Candy and Grenda tickets to Northwest Fest. After capturing the ghost, he accidentally lets him loose after he tells Dipper the story of the Northwest Manor, and returns to the mansion, bringing the taxidermy animals to life and turning everyone into wood. This breaks his newfound friendship with Pacifica. After seeing everyone turned to wood, he seeks out Pacifica’s help to recapture him, but is ultimately turned into a wooden statue. After Pacifica opens the gates, he is brought back to life. Over the course of the adventure, he develops a new friendship with Pacifica.


Dipper, Mabel and Soos shocked at the revelation.

In "Not What He Seems," Dipper and Mabel are taken in by child services after the government arrest Stan. They escape custody to prove Stan's innocence, but quickly discover that there's more to Stan than they realized. After getting into his lab, Dipper, along with Mabel and Soos, discovers that Stan had the journals this whole time, and he grows very angry. Soon after, they find a way to shut off the portal, and just as Dipper is about to press the off button, Stan interrupts them saying that he shouldn't press the button, and to trust him. The portal causes Dipper, Mabel, Stan, and Soos to get pushed to the walls of the lab, but Mabel is the closest to the button. Dipper tells her to shut it down, but Stan convinces her not to, much to Dipper's distress. Dipper and the others then watch as the author of the journals emerges from the portal, and is revealed by Stan to be his brother.

In "A Tale of Two Stans," Dipper is overcome with excitement when he meets Ford Pines, shrieking with delight when the journals are mentioned and almost throwing up, to which he is eager to ask Ford lots of questions. In the end, before he goes to sleep, he promises Mabel he will never fight with her as Stan and Ford did and that they will always be friends.


Dipper and Ford in real-life Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons.

In "Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons," Dipper receives a copy of the titular game in the mail. He tries to persuade Mabel and Stan to play with him, but they refuse. After he accidentally falls into the basement and Ford sees Dipper's 38-sided die, they begin playing together. Their game takes over the house, much to Stan, Mabel, and Grenda's annoyance. After Stan accidentally rolls the infinity sided die and releases Probabilitor the Annoying, Ford and Dipper are captured by the wizard and taken to the forest. Later in the episode, the others arrive, Probabilitor shrinks Ford and Dipper, turning them into characters for the game. With Stan and Mabel's help, they defeat Probabilitor. After the adventure, Ford shows Dipper what he's been doing in the basement; not only did he destroy the portal, he also contained an interdimensional rift created by the portal. Dipper promises to keep the rift's existence a secret.

In "The Stanchurian Candidate," Dipper uses a mind-control tie given by Ford to make Stan win the election for mayor of Gravity Falls against Bud. Dipper then reveals this to Stan out of anger which makes it so Stan doesn't wear the tie. At the debate, Dipper and Mabel use the tie on Soos so Bud doesn't win. They soon figure out Gideon's been controlling Bud so he can win and get out of prison. Gideon then traps Dipper and Mabel inside the statue of Mayor Befufftlefumpter, planning to later kill them in the explosion of fireworks. Stan then notices and saves them and by doing that he wins the election. After Stan is disqualified and Tyler wins, they go vandalize his new mansion.


Dipper threatens to erase Ford's mind after being convinced that he's possessed by Bill.

In "The Last Mabelcorn," Dipper and Mabel are looking for board games to play when Ford calls for a family meeting. When they gather around the table, Ford shows the twins a symbol of Bill Cipher and asks if they recognize it, which they immediately do. Dipper tells his and Mabel's experience with Bill and Ford warns them that the fact that they have dealt with Bill is gravely serious. While Ford sends Mabel to find unicorn hair, Ford brings Dipper to his private study. There, Ford tells Dipper if they cannot Bill-proof the shack, then they will Bill-proof their minds and Dipper is put into the Project Mentem which reads all of his thoughts so it can encrypt Dipper's mind. When the encryption takes too long, Dipper becomes curious about Ford's relation to Bill so he puts the Project Mentem on Ford's head, and sees Ford making a deal with Bill. Ford wakes up and Dipper (thinking Ford is possessed by Bill) takes the rift and the memory-erasing gun to defend himself from Ford. He fires the gun, but the beam ricochets off Ford due to the metal plating in his head and destroys the machine. Dipper apologizes and Ford decides to finally tell Dipper about his history with Bill. When Dipper learns about Bill's true plans, he becomes increasingly worried. Ford tells Dipper that there should be no more secrets between them. Dipper smiles but worries again because he broke the machine, so they have no protection against Bill. Mabel then comes in with a lock of unicorn hair. Afterward, Dipper is seen helping Ford Bill-proof the shack by sticking the unicorn hair around the outside of the building.


Stan's dating advice begins to backfire for Dipper.

During "Roadside Attraction," Mabel realizes that Dipper is still not over his crush on Wendy; so Soos suggested going with them on Stan's revenge trip to help him move on. When they reach their first tourist trap to prank Dipper tries talking to a girl but completely fails in doing so, Stan then calls Dipper to help with his prank. After feeling embarrassed about his attempt to talking with girls, Dipper is given advice by Stan on how to talk with girls. They go to their next tourist trap to prank and Dipper tries once again to talk to a girl, this time taking Stan's advice and he succeeds. Dipper gets more contact info from the girls he meets using Stan's advice. As they travel to their final tourist trap to prank, the Mystery Mountain, Mabel, and Grenda take the opportunity and get Dipper and Candy to sit together. Dipper panics after Candy asks him on a date and Stan tells him to go on a date with her. When Dipper and Candy go on their date, the girls that Dipper previously flirted with were coincidentally on the same tourist trap as they are, ruining Dipper and Candy's date. Dipper looks for Stan to get more advice, however, Stan is caught by Darlene, an Arachnimorph and Dipper goes to the girls for help. The girls are angry at Dipper for what he did but he tells them they can kill him later as they need to help Stan from Darlene. They climb the mountain and free Stan, however, they are chased by Darlene but they manage to escape thanks to Candy. After the unfortunate turn of events, everyone heads back to the RV and leaves the place. Stan admits to Dipper that he is actually bad with girls, however, Dipper says he is also just as bad but Stan's advice helped him move on from Wendy. Dipper then gives Candy an apology pamphlet and tells her he's sorry. Candy tells Dipper after seeing him scream from Darlene, she lost interest in him which Dipper says he deserved. When they return, Dipper admits feeling bad about the pranks but Stan says everyone loves his pranks, however, when they return to the Mystery Shack, they see all the other tourist trap owners vandalizing the place.


Dipper agrees to become Ford's apprentice.

In "Dipper and Mabel vs. the Future," Mabel wakes Dipper up and tells him that their birthday is coming up. The two become excited as they are finally going to be teenagers, Stan and Soos join in the excitement for the upcoming week. Mabel, Dipper, and Soos begin planning for the twin's birthday party but Stan tells them they can't due to their previous party incident. Ford yells for Dipper's help to get his attention quickly and Dipper runs to Ford to help. Ford shows Dipper the interdimensional rift case slowly cracking and shows him what will happen if Bill fulfills his plans. Ford decides to take Dipper along with him to help seal the rift but Dipper worries about helping Mabel, Mabel overhears their conversation and allows Dipper to go with Ford, giving him her support and walkie-talkie so they can talk to each other. Dipper and Ford then set on their mission to find an adhesive to seal the rift and at the weirdly shaped cliff in Gravity Falls, Ford shows Dipper how the cliff was formed. Ford then takes Dipper into the abandoned UFO buried under Gravity Falls and Dipper becomes excited. As they venture further down, Ford questions Dipper about his future plans, Dipper tells his plans and Ford eventually offers his great-nephew to become his apprentice. Dipper worries about school but Ford tells his nephew of his 12 PhD's., Dipper then worries about Mabel but Ford believes Mabel will be fine on her own. Finally, Dipper worries about his own capabilities as he couldn't even operate Ford's magnet gun but Ford sees Dipper accidentally finding the adhesive they need to seal the rift. Dipper and Ford are then confronted by two UFO security droids and Dipper panics, causing the droids to attack. Ford gets captured by one of the droids but Dipper acts quickly in order to stop the droid going further. When the other droid confronts Dipper, the droid self-disassembled after detecting a calm Dipper. Ford once again tries to convince Dipper to be his apprentice and Dipper accepts. At home, Dipper sees Mabel sad as she overheard Dipper accepting Ford's apprenticeship and Mabel runs out of the house. Dipper goes to Ford's lab and Ford sees that Mabel didn't take Dipper's decision well. They try to seal the rift with the adhesive but Mabel accidentally took Dipper's bag. As Dipper and Ford run outside, they witness Bill fulfill his plans.


Dipper narrowly manages to escape from The Horrifying Sweaty One-Armed Monstrosity.

In "Weirdmageddon Part 1," Dipper and Ford witness more of Weirdmageddon as creatures of Gravity Falls flee the area. Ford tells Dipper that Bills is getting stronger the longer the rift is open and the two set out to stop Bill once more. The two go to the clock tower and Ford attempts to shoot Bill but gets distracted and misses. Bill blasts the clock tower and Ford gets stuck, telling Dipper to escape with the journals. Dipper confronts Bill when Bill turns Ford to gold but Dipper fails to do anything. Bill then tells 8 Ball and Teeth to eat Dipper. After 3 days, Dipper avoids capture and eventually meets Wendy at the mall. The two share their stories about their experience and the two head outside. Dipper feels down due to being unable to do anything without Mabel but Wendy encourages Dipper to find his sister so they can stop Bill again. Dipper and Wendy along with Toby Determined go to the abandoned Automart and attempt to take a car but they get surrounded by Gideon Gleeful and his fellow inmates. Dipper and Wendy manage to escape Gideon's gang and steal a car to drive to Mabel's bubble. They are chased by Gideon and manage to escape. They meet Soos near the bubble but Gideon and his gang surround them once more. Dipper tries to reason with Gideon about Mabel and Gideon eventually agrees to help stop Bill. Dipper unlocks the chains of Mabel's bubble and along with Wendy and Soos, they go into Mabel's bubble together.


Dipper and Mabel embrace in a sincere sibling hug.

In "Weirdmageddon 2: Escape From Reality," Dipper, Wendy, and Soos drive into Mabel's bubble, in order to rescue her. When they reach the ground, Xyler and Craz meet them and take them to Mabel's tower. The group raids the tower to save Mabel but when Mabel wakes up, she reveals that she created the place called Mabeland. Dipper attempts to persuade Mabel to leave her imaginary world but Mabel instead shows she created a more supportive brother, Dippy Fresh, in replacement of Dipper and prefers to stay. When Wendy and Soos get distracted due to Mabel granting wishes for what they desire, Dipper leaves Mabel's tower and contemplates the situation. Wendy joins him in conversation, telling Dipper that if Mabel changed Dipper's age, he can finally date her but when he sees Wendy wink, he realizes it was fake. Dipper shouts wanting to return to the real world and he is quickly arrested. Mabel saves Dipper from banishment but Dipper is tried in court for Fantasy vs. Reality. Xyler and Craz present Mabel's case, showing Dipper and Mabel's unfortunate events through their years but Dipper counter argues that Mabel simply wanted to escape reality because she didn't want to grow up. Dipper shows that even through their tough times, they were there to support each other all the way through and Mabel accepts the truth, giving Dipper a 'sincere' sibling hug. When they pat each other, the creatures of Mabeland go against them but the twins, Wendy, Soos, as well as Xyler and Craz, escape from the bubble. Mabel apologizes to Dipper and tells him if he can be Ford's apprentice if he wants but Dipper instead tells Mabel he will go with her since he doesn't wanna miss her teenage years. The group returns to the Mystery Shack after seeing the town deserted. The group proceeds to raid the Shack after hearing noises only to be met by Stan and his resistance group who are taking refuge inside the Mystery Shack.


Dipper and Mabel rally the survivors into rescuing Ford and fighting back against Bill.

In "Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls," Dipper reunites with Stan and most of the town's survivors in the Mystery Shack. Dipper is frustrated at Stan's unwillingness to fight back against Bill and manages to rally the survivors by telling them Ford knew Bill's secret weakness. He helps McGucket build the Shacktron and pilots it as it fights off Bill's henchmaniacs. As Bill fights the Shacktron, Dipper is with the rescue team charged with getting into the Fearamid and rescuing Ford along with everybody captured by Bill. Once Ford is rescued, he tells everybody about the Zodiac and how it can destroy Bill. Dipper represented the Pine Tree and the wheel is almost successful. However, Stan and Ford break into an argument and the wheel doesn't work right when Bill returned.


Dipper and Mabel look out the window of the bus as they leave Gravity Falls.

Bill changes all but Dipper, Mabel, Stan, and Ford into tapestries and threatens the children if Ford doesn't tell him how to destroy the barrier surrounding Gravity Falls. Mabel distracts Bill by putting spray paint in his eye as she and Dipper attempt to escape while Bill furiously chases them. Bill recaptures them after they get to a dead end and see the townsfolk in the Shacktron trapped by Bill's henchmaniacs. Bill threatens to kill one of the twins when Ford agrees to let Bill into his mind in exchange for letting Dipper, Mabel, and Stan go. When Bill enters Ford's mind, he realizes he was tricked as he actually entered Stan's mind which Ford would erase with the Memory Erasing Gun to destroy Bill once and for all. After the plan works and Gravity Falls is returned to normal, Dipper and the rest of his family grieve over Stan sacrificing his memory to save everybody. Their attempts at jogging Stan's memory appear to be fruitless until Waddles jumps on Stan and he starts to remember everything about him eventually recovering his entire memory. Later in the week, Dipper and Mabel celebrate their 13th birthday with the town. When asked to make a wish, Dipper replies that he already got everything he ever wanted that summer. As Dipper and Mabel prepare to depart Gravity Falls, Wendy takes Dipper's hat while giving him hers as something to remember her by along with a letter for the next time he misses Gravity Falls. As the bus drives away with Dipper and Mabel, Dipper opens the letter which is a note that says "See you next summer" signed by all of the friends Dipper and Mabel made while they were in Gravity Falls.

Personality

Dipper exploring a cave.

Dipper is intelligent, compassionate, self-conscious and rational, and sometimes, overly judgmental, and can't wait to grow up. An adventurer at heart, Dipper can't sit still and is always looking for the next riddle or mystery to solve. His scrupulous attention to detail is useful when he is attempting to solve mysteries but sometimes his over-zealousness can leave others questioning his credibility. Dipper is shown to be extremely "genre-savvy." Knowing that in most movies, nobody has a camera when they see the monster, or that the camera malfunctions, he brings along 17 cameras with him to take a photo of the Gobblewonker. He is wise and intelligent beyond his years, and his refusal to sit still when there are puzzles to be solved often leaves him restless in everyday situations. In "Carpet Diem," he has a habit of clicking his pen repeatedly when in deep thought. He also seems to get very irritated when people think he's “cute” or “adorable”, as he wants to be taken seriously as a grown-up from people around him as at most times Dipper is more mature than others. He began glaring at his twin sister Mabel when she commented that he "Sneezed like a kitten" in the episode "Headhunters".[13] When Dipper and Mabel (and Soos at times) are on their adventures Dipper is the one to act as the leader mostly because he is shown to be very brave and smart. He is somewhat protective of his sister,[15] whenever she is in danger he is always there to help and will do anything to get her free.


Dipper, in Mabel's body, pretending to be mad.

He can sometimes be selfish and is not above using Gravity Falls' mysterious elements to his advantage. He can also be ruthless in the pursuit of his goals such as not apologizing for attacking Soos in "Not What He Seems" unlike Mabel who apologized prior to grappling him but ultimately he always does the right thing and has the right motivations. It is also well mentioned that Dipper is paranoid and has had trust issues since the beginning when the journal warned him to "Trust No One" and has been skeptical about people and/or situations. For example, in "The Last Mabelcorn", he fearfully backs away from Stanford Pines who he mistakes for being possessed while holding a memory gun pointed at his head, muttering the phrase "Trust no one" repeatedly to himself. With his experience in Gravity Falls as well as his knowledge in the mystery novels that he reads, Dipper thinks much like an actual detective, as seen in "Headhunters."

Despite his brave and serious personality, living with Mabel Pines his whole life (who is famous for her silly attitude) has caused him to indulge in childish activities with her. Such as when both he and Mabel made puking noises whilst spraying silly string onto each other's faces in "Double Dipper". When a video was displayed in the future detailing the twins' current positions in "Blendin's Game", it showed Dipper and Mabel hitting each other with soft bats while laughing. Whilst playing miniature golf in "Carpet Diem", Mabel states that his shot is out of bounds, to which he responds by poking her with the golf club and shouting "YOU'RE out of bounds!", ending up with both twins poking each other.

He also seems to not mind breaking the law in order to have some fun. For example, in "The Stanchurian Candidate", when Stanley Pines asks Dipper and Mabel if they want to vandalize the new mayor's house, they both follow their uncle while cheering for joy and Dipper even yells "Yay! Vandalism!". In "Not What He Seems" Stanley, Mabel, and Dipper are seen on the roof of the Mystery Shack bonding by exploding fireworks. When asked by the police if they have a permit, Stanley responds with "Do you have a permit for being lame?" to which they all laugh. In a "Fixin' it with Soos" episode, Soos tells Dipper and Wendy to hit the nitrous boosters that he installed onto the golf cart. Dipper asks "Aren't those illegal?" and Soos responds with "You bet your life they are baby!" All three of them then laugh with joy as the golf cart drastically speeds up.

Appearance
Dipper Pines appearance.png
Dipper's hidden birthmark.

Dipper wears a dark moderate blue and white hat with a dark moderate blue brim and a dark moderate blue pine tree on the front. He has somewhat messy brown hair and relatively pale skin, and his nose is a bit darker than the rest of his face. His eyes are brown,[27] like Mabel's, with noticeable bags underneath.[28] He wears a navy blue vest, (which has inner pockets on both sides) a reddish-orange t-shirt, gray shorts, white knee-high socks with a red stripe, black sneakers with white soles, and a sometimes visible gray digital wristwatch. He is sometimes seen with a green backpack. He has a birthmark on his forehead shaped like the constellation, the Big Dipper, hence his nickname "Dipper," which he hides under his bangs. He is exactly one millimetre shorter than his sister, Mabel Pines[18], however, he grows taller than her throughout the show. His only other clothes seen on the show are the hat he arrived in Gravity Falls with, his lamb costume in "The Inconveniencing," the peanut butter costume he wore in "Summerween," the wolf costume that Grunkle Stan made Dipper wear for an attraction at the Mystery Shack and, later, his tourist guide clothes in "Boss Mabel," the white shirt, red swimsuit and red and white hat he wore as a lifeguard uniform in "The Deep End," a v-neck and full-length black pants he wore for the Woodstick Festival in "The Love God," and a tuxedo in "Northwest Mansion Mystery." As of "Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls," he receives and wears Wendy's lumberjack hat.

His nightwear or comfortable outfit for hanging around the Mystery Shack is the same as his regular outfit, but without his hat, vest or shoes.

Relationships
Mabel Pines

Dipper's always got Mabel's back.

Dipper considers Mabel his "Closest Ally and Best Friend."[29] Being siblings, they have been close throughout their entire lives. Despite getting on each other's nerves, contrasting personalities, and frequent sibling bickering, the two love each other regardless. They often engage in various recreational activities and enjoy having fun with each other, and they constantly investigate their summer home's mysterious secrets side by side. Dipper and Mabel give one another advice and are willing to sacrifice much for the others' sake, albeit not always initially, and have risked their lives more than once to help each other. However in "Not What He Seems," it's hinted that Dipper's relationship with Mabel may have been broken, due to her trusting Stan over him but in "A Tale of Two Stans," Dipper held no grudge towards her for trusting Stan but Mabel is left unsettled about their future relationship due to Stan and Ford's dysfunctional relationship. He does, however, hint in "Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons" that he may still be carrying some ill-feelings after Mabel and Grunkle Stan's numerous taunts at his interests, though they were never meant in bad faith.

In "Dipper and Mabel vs. the Future," Mabel overhears Dipper accepting Ford's offer to become his apprentice and is so terrified and upset at the thought of her and Dipper not growing up together that she runs off crying into the forest. She does not wish to see summer end and have to leave Gravity Falls, leading to her inadvertently handing the portal's rift to Bill Cipher. However, in "Weirdmageddon 2: Escape From Reality," Dipper convinces Mabel to leave her perfect prison bubble by promising her that he won't take Ford's apprenticeship and will always be there for her, having realized they can get through anything together, leading the twins to reconcile.

Stan Pines

Stan laughs at Dipper.

Stan does not take his role as Dipper's summer caretaker very seriously, often irresponsibly allowing and/or forcing him and his sister to do dangerous and sometimes illegal things. Stan frequently enlists Dipper in his plans to make a quick buck, with the latter frequently paying the consequence of the former's actions. The two do not always see eye-to-eye, often about Stan's illegal activity or Dipper's "immature" behavior and qualities. Nonetheless, the two share mutual compassion for one another, and they enjoy each other's company. Dipper has also been shown to be willing to take potentially fatal risks for his uncle.[18] In "Dreamscaperers," it's revealed that the reason Stan is hard on Dipper is to toughen him up so that when the world fights, Dipper will fight back. However, as of the events of "Not What He Seems," Dipper has lost trust in Stan but in "A Tale of Two Stans" Dipper apologizes for distrusting him and Stan forgives him and understands his distrust. Dipper sometimes finds it irritable when Stan and other characters make fun of him for how he does things and what he likes, but Dipper does enjoy spending time with him.

Soos Ramirez

Dipper and Soos on the same wavelength.

Dipper and Soos are generally good friends. They usually relate well, with them doing some "guy stuff" together,[12] and Soos often gives Dipper guidance.[9][17] Additionally, Soos frequently acts as Dipper's and Mabel's sidekick as they investigate Gravity Falls' mysteries, and may take charge on occasion. However, Soos' childish antics sometimes irritate Dipper, as they have a tendency to mess up whatever mission that Dipper is on. For example, in "Land Before Swine," Dipper was very annoyed when Soos destroyed the pictures of the pterodactyl he took, and Dipper didn't trust Soos on the mission of going to rescue Waddles.

Wendy Corduroy

Dipper and Wendy hanging out at the Mystery Fair.

Wendy and Dipper are on friendly terms and like to hang out together for the fun of it, often breaking rules in the process. Dipper has a huge crush on Wendy,[4] though he does not necessarily believe they will be together because of their age gap.[21] Regardless, he attempts to impress her and frequently finds himself in sticky situations as a result. He will sometimes mutter certain things to himself under his breath, thinking that Wendy can not hear him (though she actually can and does). Since Wendy is three years older than he is, Dipper tries to come across as mature and capable of being around Wendy's other friends. Dipper resents Wendy's relationship with Robbie, due to his jealousy. After Dipper reveals his feelings to her, Wendy gently lets him down and gets him to admit he always knew a relationship couldn't really work between them, but tells him its important to her that they can still be friends, and he readily accepts that.

Robbie Valentino

Robbie taunting Dipper.

Robbie and Dipper are arch-rivals, primarily driven by both wanting to win Wendy's affection. While Robbie views his relationship with his crush as a victory for himself, he fears Dipper will appeal to her. Robbie likes to make fun of Dipper, is very condescending in his remarks, and has even resorted to attempts at physical violence to prove his point. Dipper, on the other hand, is angered and annoyed by Robbie. Even though they are initially more vocal about their dislike of one another, they eventually agree not to brawl in front of Wendy, due to fear that they will both lose her if she sees them fight.[17]

During the events of "The Love God," Robbie blames Dipper for Wendy dumping him and announces a hatred towards every member of the Pines family for "ruining his life." It is unknown if Robbie and Dipper still hate each other since they have both given up on trying to win Wendy's affection.

In "Weirdmageddon Part 3: Take Back The Falls," Robbie is seen playfully chanting "one of us" after Dipper and Mabel blow out the candles on their cake and his signature is seen alongside many other signatures on a note that was given to Dipper by Wendy as a parting gift so that Dipper can remember them all.

Gideon Gleeful

Gideon vs. Dipper.

Gideon views Dipper and his family as a nuisance, feeling that they prevent him from accomplishing his goals (i.e. winning Mabel's love[12] and taking over the Mystery Shack[18]). So, the evil boy often tries to rid himself of the Pines, while Dipper combats him, usually successfully with his sister's aid. The two have been known to underestimate each other at times, but still, see each other as great threats.

Despite disliking Gideon, Dipper agrees that Gideon has an "admittedly beautiful singing voice."[29]

In "Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls," Dipper shows concern for Gideon after discovering his punishment by Bill for helping Dipper. After Bill is defeated, Gideon is shown at Mabel and Dipper's birthday party and thanking the twins for convincing him to turn over a new leaf. Gideon's signature is seen alongside many other signatures on a note that was given to Dipper by Wendy as a parting gift so that Dipper can remember them all.

Dipper and Mabel's parents

Dippers' parents prepare the twins for their summer away from home.

Not much is known about Dipper's relationships with his parents, though he does at first seem upset by their decision to have him spend his summer in Gravity Falls and regrets the "Lamby Lamby Dance" Mrs. Pines used to have him perform.

Candy Chiu and Grenda

The trio try to help Mabel plan.

Candy and Grenda are primarily Mabel's best friends, but Dipper seems well-acquainted with them, seeing them both as allies (though he admits this is partially because he wouldn't want to get on Grenda's bad side, considering how strong she is[29]). He is fairly welcoming of his sister's best friends and accepts their eccentricities, some of which may come in handy for situations handled as a group. However, he is bothered by the boisterous sleepovers they sometimes have with Mabel that force him out of the room for the night. In "The Love God" he is also seen as a wooden figure while Mabel is matchmaking next to Candy, implying that Mabel considers Dipper and Candy to be a possible future match. However in "Dungeons Dungeons and More Dungeons" Grenda is willing to let Dipper and Ford be killed by the Wizard so that she, Mabel and Stan can watch Duck-tective. In "Roadside Attraction," Candy harbors a crush on Dipper during their trip when he commented on her glasses and how shiny they were. This progresses throughout the episode until she loses interest when Dipper runs away from Darlene.

In "Weirdmageddon Part 3: Take Back The Falls," their signatures are seen alongside many other signatures on a note which was given to Dipper by Wendy as a parting gift so that he can remember them all.

Pacifica Northwest

Dipper tries to talk to Pacifica in a time of need.

Due to her history of relentlessly teasing his sister Mabel, Dipper showed hostility toward Pacifica from the get-go. Despite Mabel and Pacifica overcoming their differences, Dipper remained reluctant to accept her, often reminding others that she's "the worst." He enjoyed any opportunity to get back at Pacifica for this, such as revealing to her that her ancestor wasn't the real founder of Gravity Falls as she had thought and convincing Mabel to beat her in mini-golf by cheating. It was only until the events of "Northwest Mansion Mystery" that the two really began to see eye to eye and were actually amiable after a series of bickering. Though initially, he assumed Pacifica confirmed herself to be the worst by lying to him about the mansion's haunting, Dipper later realized that Pacifica regretted lying to him, was ashamed of her family and herself and was sympathetic to her situation. He apologizes and reassures her that she doesn't have to be like her parents and that her ancestors do not dictate who she is as a person. Later, upon seeing Dipper turned to wood by the ghost, Pacifica overcomes the will of her parents, saving him and the other guests. After the incident, they are seen enjoying each other's company, having moved past their animosity and become friends.

Their relationship is mentioned in the Conspiracy Corner segment, "Relation Shipping," where McGucket seems to imply that the two may have a romantic relationship or are romantically interested in each other. However, this is followed by a clip of Dipper and Mabel recoiling in disgust.

In "Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls," Pacifica is slightly less aggressive to Dipper in comparison to her interactions with Mabel but she is still aggressive to him during Weirdmageddon by threatening to sue him and other resistance members if she dies during the rescue. But after Bill is defeated, she is seen in Dipper and Mabel's birthday party, having brought presents for them and regarding that, she wrapped them herself. Afterward, her signature is seen alongside many other signatures on a note which was given to Dipper by Wendy as a parting gift so that he can remember them all.

According to Gravity Falls: Journal 3, Dipper reveals that he thinks Pacifica looks nice in a dress and that she smells like champagne and flowers. He then remarks on "some vibe" that he just felt. However, this sentence is crossed out, similar to earlier sentences about Wendy. He also draws a picture of Pacifica in a similar style to a drawing he made of Wendy earlier in the Journal.[30]

In the Gravity Falls: Lost Legends story "Face It", Dipper becomes angry with Pacifica when Mr. What's-His-Face takes Mabel's face after Pacifica uses Journal 1 to summon him. Later, after they get captured while trying to save Mabel, Pacifica reveals that she's under a lot of pressure from her parents, believing that without her looks, she isn't sure who she is. Dipper reassures her that she is more than just a pretty face and that she shouldn't care about what her family thinks, after which she hugs him. Shmebulock comments on this, saying that Dipper “learned that the best place for romance is in a burlap sack.” He also “intercepted” a text exchange where she tells Dipper that she was just wiping monster drool off on him, which could mean that the two are texting each other, however she realises that he does not have a phone and she is texting Mabel who teases her about the hug, to Pacifica’s annoyance. After she gives up a chance for Mr. What's-His-Face to improve her looks, instead choosing to save Dipper and Mabel, they all escape and Pacifica thanks them for helping her realize that she shouldn't worry about her looks.[31]

Ford Pines

Ford and Dipper both playing Dungeons, Dungeons, and more Dungeons.

Even before learning of his identity, Dipper held the author of the journals in high regard, hoping to one day meet him. When he finally learned the truth, Dipper tried to question Ford on his work but was stopped by Stan. In "Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons," Dipper asked Ford if he could help with his work, but following a private agreement with Stan, Ford turned him down claiming that it was too dangerous. Later in the episode Dipper and Ford bond over their favorite board game, Dungeons, Dungeons, and More Dungeons. After they defeated Probabilitor the Annoying together, Ford decided to trust Dipper with the knowledge of a dimensional rift he sealed away, swearing Dipper to secrecy. Dipper has shown a liking for Ford since he does not make fun of him like Mabel and Stan tend to do. In "The Last Mabelcorn," Ford and Dipper try to work together to prevent Bill from getting inside their minds, but Dipper is curious about their history that Ford refused to share until Dipper used his machine to read his mind and learn about their past. After some misunderstanding, Ford decides to be honest with Dipper about Bill tricking his and Bill's dark plans. Ford promises to Dipper that he will be honest with him from then on. They seem to be very trusting towards each other and even see each other not only as a family but also as friends. Ford even asked Dipper to stay in Gravity Falls and become his apprentice, showing how far his faith in his great-nephew went. As revealed in Journal 3, Dipper also entrusts Ford with his real name, showing that he trusts Ford enough to keep it a secret.

Abilities

Dipper's complex math equation.

Dipper's best skills are his mental intellect and persistence. During the mysterious situations Dipper and Mabel get into, Dipper has shown to be the one to lead them out using his quick and clever thinking.[9] He is shown to think very logically and rational compared to those around him and displays a high level of intelligence and maturity. Even though Dipper is thought not to be physically adept, he is capable of defending himself when it comes to fights, as he was able to hold his own when he sword-dueled against Wax Sherlock Holmes and fended off the Summerween Trickster alongside his friends. Dipper has also shown to be able to take part in hand-to-hand combat such as when fighting against Gideon and has brought down the mighty Multi-Bear, as well as surviving being pummeled by Rumble McSkirmish. He also completed 49 of 50 ritual trials undertaken by the Manotaurs. He is better than his sister at most games, including chess, checkers, ping pong and croquet. He can also play the sousaphone, as revealed in "Tooth."

Dipper has displayed a great level of academic intelligence, as shown in "The Time Traveler's Pig," when he is able to complete complex math equations in a short amount of time, creating the perfect angle at which to throw a ball. He is also known to be resourceful; In "Little Dipper" when he was unable to reach high enough to grab the journal, he was able to kick the shelf it was on, in order to have it falls into his arms as well as using some items to help him and Mabel get back to the shack while shrunken. Dipper has also shown the ability to outwit others, such as in "Dipper vs. Manliness," when he tricked the Manotaurs into teaching him, and again in "Dreamscaperers," when Dipper was the first to figure out how to fight against Bill Cipher and beating him at his own game using his imagination to conjure various weapons and abilities to use against Bill.

Sightings
Intro: "Gravity Falls Main Title Theme"
Season 1
Every episode of Season 1
Shorts
1. "Candy Monster"
2. "Stan's Tattoo"
3. "Mailbox"
4. "Lefty"
5. "Tooth"
6. "The Hide-Behind"
7. "Mabel's Guide to Dating"
8. "Mabel's Guide to Stickers"
9. "Mabel's Guide to Fashion"
10. "Mabel's Guide to Color"
11. "Mabel's Guide to Art"
12. "Fixin' It with Soos: Golf Cart"
16. "Mabel's Scrapbook: Heist Movie"
17. "Mabel's Scrapbook: Petting Zoo"
Season 2
Every episode of Season 2
Games
Every game
Quotes
"Ah, summer break; a time for leisure, recreation, and taking 'er easy... unless you're me. My name is Dipper. The girl about to puke is my sister Mabel. You're probably wondering what we're doing in a golf cart, fleeing from a creature of unimaginable horror. Rest assured, there's a perfectly logical explanation."
—Dipper's opening monologue[source]

"Mabel, I have very keen powers of observation. For example, just by smelling your breath, I can tell that you have been eating... an entire tube of toothpaste?"
—Dipper Pines[source]

"She's not much for first impressions, unlike this guy! ...This guy..."
—Dipper making a first impression[source]

"Yes! Time to show Grunkle Stan how a real mystery hunter does it. Dipper out!"
—Dipper Pines[source]

"You're the worst."
—Dipper to Pacifica[source]

"Bill thinks there's no heroes in this world, but if we work together and fight back, we can defeat him. You wanna be Mabel's hero? Stand up to Bill, and let us save her!"
—Dipper Pines[source]

"If you've ever taken a road trip through the Pacific Northwest, you've probably seen a bumper sticker for a place called Gravity Falls. It's not on any maps, and most people have never heard of it. Some people think it's a myth. But if you're curious, don't wait. Take a trip. Find it. It's out there somewhere in the woods, waiting."
—Dipper's final narration[source]

Trivia
"Dipper" is actually a nickname, given for the Big Dipper-shaped birthmark on his forehead.[14] As seen in Mabel's Guide to Art, he had it by at the latest the time he was five years old.[7]
Dipper's birthmark was inspired by one of Alex's high school classmates "who had horrendous acne." Alex would map "out his face like constellations." One day, when doing this, his classmate "had the perfect Big Dipper on his forehead."[32]
Jeff Rowe jokingly tweeted that "Dipper's real name is Llamanic. Like Dominic, but tragically misspelled since birth."[33]
In "Between the Pines," Hirsch revealed that Dipper's name "has a similarity" to Mabel's, much as Stanford and Stanley Pines were given similar names, but he didn't say exactly what it was.
Though it is never revealed in the series, in Journal 3 Dipper tells Ford that his real name is Mason.
The name "Mason" means "Stoneworker." This fits, as "Stanley" means "Stone Clearing" and "Stanford" means "Stony Meadow."
"Mason," may also tie into the Masonic Eye of Providence imagery used throughout the series in reference to Bill Cipher.
Dipper dislikes his real name, calling it "kind of a dumb name," so he exclusively uses his nickname around others, guarding his real name in secrecy.
Ford, in Don't Dimension It, forces Stan to reveal that even he doesn't know Dipper's real name. It is unknown whether nobody told him, or if Mr. and Mrs. Pines told him and he simply forgot. Other characters, like Wendy, know that "Dipper" is a nickname, but Mabel is likely the only other character in the series who knows his real name.[14][31]
Dipper has been to the County Jail with Mabel and Stan, due to them making counterfeit money during a "family bonding day."[10]
Dipper was born five minutes after Mabel. She brings this up occasionally, using this as an excuse to "tell him when he is older," much to his annoyance.[3]
Dipper has always wanted to be named Tyrone.[14]
In both episodes in which Dipper handles ice ("The Time Traveler's Pig" and "The Inconveniencing"), he spills it.
Despite Dipper's supposed lack of athletic ability, he can pitch a baseball with enough power to bounce it off a wall and hit Wendy.
Dipper writes about his adventures and confrontations with the paranormal for the Gravity Falls Gossiper. They are published along with other readers' letters in the "home and garden section" of the newspaper. [34]
His and Mabel's middle names are their parents' first names,[35] as is the case with Alex Hirsch and his sister Ariel Hirsch.
In a canceled episode that parodied Labyrinth, it was revealed that he has a fear of puppets; however, in "Sock Opera," he appears to have no particular problem with them.[7][36]
Dipper's favorite band is a nerd rock band called "The Bad First Impressions." He also secretly listens to Top 40 hits, and the girly Icelandic pop group, BABBA. A parody of the Swedish pop group ABBA[37][13]
Dipper is secretly envious that Mabel has better social skills than him.[37]
This is contrasting to Mabel, who is jealous of Dipper's intellectual skills.
Dipper has written a theme song for himself, which he regularly sings in the shower.[29]The lyrics to that theme song were revealed in the full version of Disco Girl, which was released as part of the Gravity Falls Vinyl Set.
Dipper has a habit of chewing pens until they break while lost in thought.[38]
Dipper had never been to a concert before the events of "The Love God." [39]
He is represented by the pine tree on the Zodiac.[40]
Dipper is ambidextrous, but tends to use his right hand more than his left.
In "Sock Opera," it is revealed that, on occasion, when Dipper stays awake for too long, he unknowingly chews on his own shirt.
Dipper is ticklish under his arm.[41]
When Dipper is wearing his vest, the neck-hole in his shirt underneath appears to be larger than it actually is.
Dipper is one out of four known characters whose minds have been entered by Bill, the others being Ford, Blendin, and Stan.
Dipper and Mabel's seasonal allergies act up at the same time.[42]
Dipper is the only character who has spoken in every episode of the series. This is due to Mabel not speaking in "Weirdmageddon Part 1" and Stan and Soos not appearing in "Northwest Mansion Mystery."
Dipper plays the sousaphone as shown in the short "Tooth."
Dipper had worn his old hat, the brown one with a star on it, since fourth grade. He believed that he couldn't wash it because it would have ruined the luck.[43] Though mildly distressed when he initially lost it, he quickly moved on and replaced it with his signature pine tree hat.
However, he writes he has worn it since the fifth grade in Journal 3.
He originally thought Wendy's name was Wanda.[44]
He and Ford share many things in common. They are both fascinated by the supernatural, they both were born with an abnormality, they both thought Soos' name was Zeus[44][45], and they're both twins.
As he confesses in "Society of the Blind Eye," he sometimes uses "big words" whose meanings he doesn't know.
Alex Hirsch said at the 2014 Comic-Con that Dipper and Mabel collect the items that they discover on their adventures.[46]
Dipper has been a finalist in three Spelling Bee competitions held at his middle school.[47]
In "Mabel's Scrapbook: Petting Zoo" it is revealed that he and Mabel once won a dogsled race against a space lizard.
According to Alex Hirsch on Twitter, he created a Sonic the Hedgehog OC (original character) called ShadowTail the InvestiGerbil, who had purple hair and a magnifying glass for a hand.[48]
During the "ULTIMATE CROSSOVER FUNDRAISER!" charity live stream, where Alex Hirsch, Dana Terrace, Rebecca Sugar, and Ian Jones-Quartey drew and sang for The Trevor Project, when asked what Dipper and Mabel would be as Gems, they answered the following (and then did Stan's too):[citation needed]
Mabel - Cherry Tugtupite. On her chest, where her heart would be.
Dipper - Larimar. On his head, possibly in the shape of his birthmark.
Stan - Pyrite (also known as fool's gold). Mirrored to Stan's tattoo on his back, which indicates vulnerability. This was actually suggested by the chat, which was wholeheartedly agreed upon by everyone else.
Dipper gives the first and last lines of the show, both in narration.
In Rick and Morty's episode "The Rickshank Rickdemption" there is a Gravity Falls Easter egg. In the Citadel of Ricks, two Morty's bear a striking resemblance to Mabel and Dipper. The Dipper Morty is even seen wearing Dipper's hat.
According to Mabel in Lost Legends, Dipper doesn't have a cell phone.
However, Mabel does, which could reveal a degree of favoritism that the parents have.
Dipper wrote a theme song for himself and he sings it in the shower.
Dipper is the only character to appear in every episode of the series.
Mabel is in every episode except "Weirdmageddon: Part 1,"
Grunkle Stan is in every episode except for "Northwest Mansion Mystery,"
Soos is in every episode except for "Irrational Treasure," and "Northwest Mansion Mystery."